# About the Author + Supporters + Foreword

## Source Metadata

- Chapter number: 1
- TOC index: 1
- Part: main
- EPUB src: index_split_004.html
- Extraction mode: fragment-aware-spine-range

## Extracted Text

About the Author

Saifedean Ammous is a world-renowned economist and author ofThe Bitcoin Standard: The Decentralized Alternative to Central Banking, the definitive and best-selling book on bitcoin, translated to 25 languages. He is also the author of the forthcoming textbookPrinciples of Economics. Saifedean teaches courses on the economics of bitcoin, and economics in the Austrian school tradition, on his online learning platformSaifedean.com, and also hostsThe Bitcoin Standard Podcast.

Supporters

The author dedicates this book to the following readers who supported the self-publication of this book by preordering signed copies. Your support and interest are the reason that I write!

60e75d5207d67cef0b16cea187be29f3c97b80cec30420427187892f4f004a4c, A. Milenkovic, A.W. Steinly, Aaron Dewey Olsen, Abdullah Moai, AceRich2020, Adam Miller, @Adelgary, Afsheen Bigdeli, Ágúst Ragnar Pétursson, Akihiko Murai, Alberto Toussaint, Alex Bowe, Alex Chizhik, Alex Gladstein, Alex Toussaint, Alexander Tarnok, Ali Meer, Alistair Milne, Amber D. Scott, Amelia Alvarez, Amine Rahmouni, Andrés M. Tomás, Andrew K Sloan, Andrew Masters, Andrew P Hickman, Andrew W. Cleveland III, M.D., Andrewstotle, Andy Goldstein, Andy Holmes, Angelina Franklin, Anonymous, Antoni Taczanowski, Antonio Caccese, Armand Tuzel, Arvin Sahakian, Arxnovum Investments, Askar Kazhygul, Avtarkaur Sachamahithinant, Chaivit Sachamahithinant, Sujitra Sachamahithinant, AZHODL.com, Baron Bloe, Bartosz Granowski, Basem Jassin, Ben Davenport, Benoit Fontaine, Bert de Groot, Bill Daniels, Bill Sousa, @BitcoinIsThePin, bitcoin-schweiz.ch GmbH, bitcoinsverige.org, BklynFrank, Braiins & Slush Pool, Brandon Nabors, Bret Leon Lusskin Jr., Brett Bondi, Brian Lockhart, Brian Bilnoski, Brian Fisher, Brian L. McMichael, Britt Kelly, Browning Hi-Power 9mm, Bryan Boot, Bryan Hennecken, Bryan S. Wilson D.O., C&H, C4R3Bear, Carlos Octavio Chida Suárez, Cedric Youngelman, Chad Welch, Chafic Chahine, Charles Ruizhongtai Qi, Chiefmonkey, Chris Rye, Chris Vallé, Christian Cora, Christof Mathys, Christophe Masiero, Christopher Chang, Christopher S. Widger, CJ Wilson, Central Valley Bitcoiners, Clancy and Joe Rodgers, Clayton Maguire, Colin Heyes, Conscious Money Creators, Craig McGarrah III, Craig S Smith, D. Akira Ulmer, Dan Carman, Dan J, Dan Skeen, Daniel Carson, Daniel G. Ostermayer, Daniel Marulanda, Daniel Oon, Darin Feinstein, Darin Wilmert, Dave Burns, David Adriani, David B. Heller, David Barry, David Bryson, David Carre, David and Shauna Jeffries, David Love, David McFadzean, David Strimaitis, Decrypted LLC, Dennis Eibel, Dennis Kohler, Derek Sheeler, Derek Waltchack, Dick Trickle, Dicka, Dmitriy Molla, Doug Devine, Doug Hemingway, Michael Milmeister & the Stormrake team @stormrake.com, Dr. And Mrs. Douglas M. Moeckel, Dr. Paul Essey, Dustin Dettmer, Dylan Hedges, Dylan Wettasinghe, Ed Becker, Edgar R Tapia Gonzalez, ElCapitan, Eliah van Dijk and Anaïs van Dijk, Elias Andalaft—co-founder Webempresario.com, Elio S. Fattorini, Emmanuel Azih Jr., Eric Dosal, Érick Zazueta Ávila, Eugen Zimbelmann, Evangeline and Jacob, Fabian, Fabian Bürger, Fadi Mantash, Felix L., Filip Karađorđević and Danica Karađorđević, Filipe Neves, Frank Acklin, Frank T. Young, Frederick D’Mello, G Charles Harrison, Gabe C., Gabriele “gurgamezcla” Gussoni, Gaël Giusti, Gareth Hayes, Gary Lau, @gauchoeddy, Gerard N, Gerd Lüdtke, Gert Kleemann, Gina Jaramillo, Giuseppe Bueti, Glenn T., Gordon S Greer, Greg and Joy Morin, Gregory Zajaczkowski, Hadi, Harvinder Singh Sawhney, Hashim Elmegreisi, Hendel Bouchelaghem, Henry Gonzalez, Herman Vissia, Housam Majid Jarrar, Hugh Fowler, Hunter Hastings, Imre Michalsky, Isabella V. Fernando, Isaias De Leon, Isandi, J Dixon, J Flow, J. Kevin Coffin, J. Woods, J.M.B., Jack Heitger, Jacob Boyer, Jacob Cherian, Jakob Kucharczyk, James DelGuercio, James Harris, James Ian Thompson, James Machado, James McCoy, James Sutherland, James Swinhoe, James Viggiano, Jan W.F. van Dort—Master in digital currencies, Janajri Family, Coinbits Team, Jarod M. Bona, Jasper de Trafford, Javier Gil, Jay Chin, Jeff and Beth Ross, Jeff Aurand, Jeff Bennett, Jeff Packard, Jeff Smith, Jeffrey S. Van Harte, Jeffrey Poppenhagen, Jeffrey Williams of ILA Local 1654., Jeremiah Albright, Jeremiah James, Jeremy Cooper and #TeamCooperOhana, Jeremy Showalter, Jerrold Randall, Jerry Aguirre, Jez San, Jimmy Weaver, @JMFM_89, Joachim B., Joe Rubio, Johan M. Bergman, John Brier, John Brown, John Connor, John Dixon, John Jolly, John Mcmillan, John Silvestro, Johnathan Ly, MD, Johnny, Johnny Walsh, Jon Tan Ling Peng, Jonas Konstandin, Jordan Friedman, Joris Kemperman, Joseph Anthony Debono, Joshua D A Vincent, Justin Won-Jun Kim, @k9ert, Kami Niles, Kapitein Geweldig, Kenny G, Kenny Mayerhofer, Kenton Ralph Toews, Kevin McKernan, Kevin Sang, Kevin Wesley Avent, Kim van Nie, Kota Kojima, Kristian Kolding, Kristian Wiborg, Kyle and Rachel Ford, Lapo Pietro, Roberto Masiero, Laura Ann Feathers, Leeron Galimidi, Lennart Zahn, Leon Lawrence Stubbs, Les DeFelice, Lexbury, Liam Birch, Lincoln Liu, Lisa Cheng, Lloyedkoh, Loay Malahmeh, Locky McWilliam, Louferlou, Louis B, Lowina Blackman, Luis C. Alonso, Luis Rivera, Lynley Pillay, Maciej Kazimieruk, Manu Beuselinck, Marco Bühler, Marco Giangiulio, Marius Reeder, Mark Ioli, Mark Moss, Mark Mulvey, Mark Rodney Gardner, Mark Simonson, Mark W Roen, Markus Lindgren, Marquie Mosley, Marquita Robinson-Garcia and DVINITI Skin Care, Marshall Long, Martin Brochhaus, Martin Roberto Richmond CFA, Mathew O’Keefe, Matija Grlj, Matt “yabapmatt” Rosen, Matt Maiuri, Matt Moran, Matt Sellitto, Maurice and Jeanne Schutte, Max, Max Guimarães, Maxon LaForge, Mazhar Memon, Michael Atwood, Michael Baker, Michael Byrne, Michael Fink, Michael Goldstein, Michael Harris, Michael Jonsson, Michal Duska and Roman Filipoiu, Milan Radojicic, Mina Eklad, Mischa Zed, Mitchel Edwards, Mitchell Kennedy, Mohammad Nauman, Money Phlow pty ltd, Mr. W. B., Nader S Dahdaleh, Nadir Seha Islam, Sibel Karakurum, Nazir Cihangir Islam, Nathan Mahaffey, Nathan Olmstead, Neal Nagely, Nicholas Sheahan and Martina Marcinska, Nick Karadza, Nick Ligerakis, Nicolás Ahumada, Nicolas Cage, Noor Elhuda El Bawab, Olly Stedall @saltedlolly, Omar Ruiz Geronimo, Omar Sabek, Omran Kaskar, Paige Webley, Pan Dermatis, panaccoman, @panicbuyingbtc, Panties for Bitcoin, Pantiesforbitcoin.com, Paolo Illing, Pattaravut Maleehuan, Paul I. Sung, Paul John Gaston, Paul Rylands, Paul Trentham, Pedro Brannum, Pei-Hsun Kao, Per Treborg, Perry Hester, Pete Cochran, Peter & Carren Egyed, Peter Francis Fenwick, Petr Žalud, Philip Guncill, Phillip Byrne, Pierre Alessandro Gmeiner, Pieter N., Pieter Voogt, PtAd, pij, pijankengur, Piotr Krzak, Piriya Sambandaraksa, Raj Shreyas Padliya, Rajan Sohal, Rauderce O., Rami Korhonen, Raven de la Cruz, Ravi Sohal, Red Pill Songs, Reina Bitcoin, Richard and Gigi, Richard Wiig, Richard Yu, Rick Pauw, Rickie Chang, Rijk Plasman, Rits Plasman, Rob (SATJ) Clark, Robert Alan Koonce, Robert B. Ferraro, Robert Del Riego, Robert Mearns, Robert Schulman, Roberto Costa Ramalhete, Roberto De Leon, Robin Thirtle, Rodolfo Novak (NVK), Rodrigo Gualberto, Roman Engelbrecht, Roman Filipoiu, Rory Orr, Rosa Jara, Rosie Featherby, Ruben Waterman, Ruslan Kuvaev, Russ, Rustin Watt, Ryan Anthony Williams, Ryan Blair, Ryan C Wilhoit, Ryan Cole, Ryan Jordan, Ryan Niles, Ryan Rinaldo, Ryan W. Slot, Sachin & Manavi Sharma, Samuel Claussen, Samuel Rufinatscha, San Family, Sanjay Srivatsa, Satoshi’s Domains, Scott C. Morgan @BtcVires, Scott S. Manhart, DDS, MS, Scott Schneider, Seb Walker, Sebastian Liu, SensibleYapper, Sergio Ruocco, Shakti Chauhan, Shao-Hsuan Kao, Shaun Thomson, Sheldon Friesen, Shire HODL, Shone Anstey at LQwD Fintech, Shone Sadler, Siim Männart, Simon Ree, Simona Macellari, Stacy, Stefano D’Amiano, Stephan Livera, Stephen Cole, Stephen Saunders, Steve and Paige Crozier, Subhan Tariq Esq., Tammy Fuller, Tarek, Tariq Al Muhtassib, Tarun K Chattoraj, The Goodspeed Family, The Stormrake team @stormrake.com, The Yingling Family, Thomas Hartland Mackie, Thomas Jaeger, Thomas Jenichen, Thomas Shelton, Tim Y., Tinoosh Zand, M.D., Tipton Cole, Tom G., Tom Karadza, Torstein Habbestad, Tyler W. Thornton, U.C.J., Esq., Mrs. Vicky Essey, Victor Goico, Vijay Boyapati, Vince Oscar Benitez, Vincent en Daan, Vinicius Kenji Hashimoto, Wallet of Satoshi, Wayne Keith (@SatoshiPrime_io), Wesley Brockman, William J. Blehm, William Johnston, wiz, Yorba, Zac Woods, Zach Herbert, Zachary Hollinshead, Zafer Özkavlak, Zane Pocock, Zsurka Zoltán András

Foreword

by Ross Stevens

Founder and Executive Chairman, NYDIG

Immediately upon its publication, Saifedean Ammous’sThe Bitcoin Standardbecame an instant classic—required reading for anyone seriously interested in understanding the importance and power of bitcoin. First taking the reader on a captivating journey through the history of money,The Bitcoin Standardthen proceeds to comprehensively lay out the first principles of bitcoin’s comparative appeal. Indeed, amidst a selection of outstanding bitcoin literature,The Bitcoin Standardsits atop the “if you only read one book about bitcoin, read this book” mantle from the bitcoin community.

Almost four years later,The Bitcoin Standardhas aged well. Bitcoin is relevant to the lives of over one hundred million people worldwide today, strongly confirming the validity of Saifedean’s central insights. Given that bitcoin, unlike fiat, is voluntarily adopted by its users in every instance, it’s appropriate to be astonished that, despite bitcoin’s short life, it has become a significant global monetary institution, providing a nonstate and nonbank means of wealth storage, as well as an apolitical and neutral transactional medium.

Overall bitcoin adoption figures are compelling, but per capita penetration rates tell an even more interesting story. Bitcoin’s greatest per capita penetration is in sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, Eastern Europe, and Southeast Asia. That citizens of these neighborhoods are among the most fervent early adopters makes sense. Whether the symptoms are advanced inflationary episodes or suffocating capital controls, citizens in the highest per capita adoption countries are attracted to bitcoin due to the failure of their local institutions, spanning weaknesses in government integrity, property rights, and monetary freedom.

Perhaps as intuitively as explicitly, the attraction hinges on bitcoin’s free-market, predetermined issuance model, which ensures that the privileged elite cannot emerge with sole access to the monetary spigot. Bitcoin’s proof of work—whereby bitcoin miners surrender electricity and computational resources to acquire new tokens—establishes a real-world cost for the resource, requiring miners to “buy in” should they want to occupy the position of the mint.

This is where Saifedean brilliantly turns things upside down in The Fiat Standard. His penetrating insight is to explain the operation of fiat by analogy to the operation of bitcoin. In this context, we can think of fiat as a digital currency, like an altcoin, defining its qualities and characteristics and its strengths and weaknesses. Saifedean analogizes fiat mining as credit creation and fiat miners as any institutions with fractional reserve requirements. Like bitcoin miners, fiat miners are incentivized to maximize token issuance for themselves. However, unlike bitcoin miners, fiat miners are not constrained by the difficulty adjustment. Thus, fiat mining has no mechanism for controlling issuance, which powerfully explains the accelerating explosion in fiat tokens, country after country, decade after decade. Saifedean’s framework further demonstrates that observed fiat collapses, like poorly designed bridges, represent nothing more than the inevitable, and inexorable, result of poor engineering.

Far from a one-sided attack on fiat,The Fiat Standardclearly illustrates and explains the advantages that made fiat’s global adoption possible. WhereasThe Bitcoin Standard’s analytical framework centered around assessing salability across time, and how it explains the monetary rise of gold and bitcoin, inThe Fiat Standard, Saifedean uses the framework of salability across space to explain the rise of fiat and how it replaced gold. This framework further forms the basis for assessing bitcoin’s rise in a fiat world, its security model, and chances of continued success.

Leveraging Saifedean’s language of “fiat tokens,” we also gain clarity on why modern central and commercial banking—combined—cause, not cure, severe economic downdrafts. By giving in to the populist clamor for ever more abundant, freely issued fiat tokens, fiat mining cripples the role of the wisest regulator, the market, by removing the most important mechanism for efficient, economy-wide allocation of capital: relative prices of sound (i.e., strictly limited) monetary tokens. Lacking restraint in fiat token issuance, sovereign defaults in 2020 were the highest they’ve been in more than twenty years, and the ratio of sovereign credit downgrades to upgrades was at an all-time high of ten to one.

With the flaws in fiat’s engineering infrastructure firmly established, Saifedean then takes us on a wide and unexpected journey, a tour de force that demonstrates the implications of these flaws in various areas of our day-to-day life, spanning architecture, family, food, science, and energy, among others. This controversial section will leave certain readers angry, strongly disagreeing, or worse. However, many open-minded readers will emerge with a cannot-unsee collection of thought-provoking questions and insights regarding fiat’s perniciousness. Saifedean’s framing of fiat as a fundamental explanation represents an important and original contribution to the discussion of why a monetary system governed by rulers leads to vast inequities, imbalances, and unintended consequences.

I will spoil no surprises here. However, as a preview of what’s to come, recall that while bitcoin requires its appropriately expensive proof-of-work process to create new tokens, fiat mining’s process obliterates the concept of opportunity cost in creating its tokens. This contrast explains the mad dashes for, and desperate clinging to, power among fiat token creators—and therefore the utter lack of surprise that this crowd feels most threatened by bitcoin. Seeing no opportunity cost to minting fiat tokens with abandon, many fiat miners act like they are getting something for nothing. Consider the wide-ranging societal implications of that perceived, of course not actual, reality.

Saifedean ends on a note of optimism mixed with practicality, exploring how fiat and bitcoin can coexist, including bitcoin potentially driving a gradual reduction in fiat debt via voluntary fiat liquidation. Accelerating bitcoin adoption, coupled with fiat’s continued decline in real terms, can generate a glide path for humanity’s step-by-step, voluntary transformation to sound money. Thus, the rise of bitcoin need not cause a catastrophic collapse of fiat, and a strong case can be made for bitcoin as a form of fiat-denominated wealth insurance, strengthening the case for a corresponding nonzero bitcoin allocation for everyone.

However, bitcoin is also a form of life insurance, though not in the traditional sense of a big payout if you die. Rather, bitcoin provides a big payout while you live, in the form—pricelessly—of personal sovereignty, freedom, and dignity. In a world replete with monetary unfairness, injustice, the institutionalization of moral hazard, and the State’s increasing domestication of our individuality, bitcoin’s incorruptible fairness, justice, truth, and beauty represent a beacon for all optimists who seek personal improvement and peace.

Perhaps just in time, each global citizen now has a choice. You can stay on the fiat standard, in which some people get to produce unlimited new units of money for free, most likely not you. Or opt in to the bitcoin standard, in which no one gets to do that, including you. With the option, now, of a monetary system governed by rules, not rulers, we can each be grateful for the opportunity, and personal responsibility, of making that choice.
