# Chapter 3 + Chapter 4

## Source Metadata

- Chapter number: 2
- TOC index: 2
- Part: main
- EPUB src: text/part0005_split_000.html
- Extraction mode: spine-range

## Extracted Text

3

Scaling I - Montreal On the weekend of September 12 and 13, 2015, there was a conference called “Scaling Bitcoin 2015 Phase 1” in Montreal, Canada. This was billed as an attempt to help resolve the conflict plaguing the community at the time. It was, at the very least, an opportunity for the major characters on either side of the debate to talk to each other. Most of the discussion thus far appeared to have been conducted via online forums; it was thought that, with face-to-face discussions, people might have a stronger chance of appreciating each other’s point of view. Who could argue against that? Crucially, those whom many regarded as the major protagonists on each side of the debate would be there, Gavin Andresen (on the large blocker side) and Gregory Maxwell (on the small blocker side). Gregory, a Bitcoin developer, was a staunch and uncompromising supporter of the smaller block side of the argument, perhaps less willing to compromise than anyone else. Gregory was exceptionally intelligent and appeared to me to have an extremely strong understanding of most of the various fields of study Bitcoin touched, from the computer science and cryptography, to the game theory and incentives. He was sometimes referred to as the Bitcoin Wizard. His very first public post on BitcoinTalk, in May 2011, was about Bitcoin transaction fees and mining incentives, describing how fees were necessary to secure the network.[26] In 2014, Gregory co-founded Blockstream, a company which appeared to consist entirely of small blockers with a business model which depended on Bitcoin fees becoming high, as Blockstream offered potential solutions to this problem. A problem which, according to the large blockers, did not, or more precisely, should not, exist. Blockstream was therefore hated by the large blockers, who considered it to have a financial conflict of interest: an incentive to keep blocks small. In Blockstream’s defense, there is considerable evidence that most of the co-founders and employees of the company supported the small blocker arguments long before the company was even created or conceived. Some of the large blockers appeared to simply have cause and effect the wrong way around. To me, the Blockstream staff appeared to have joined the company because of the pre-existing view they had about scaling, rather than having come to that view after joining Blockstream. On the other hand, confirmation bias and groupthink are real problems, and it may have been a little bit of both. However, contrary to the claims of the conspiracy theorists, nobody at Blockstream was being deliberately malicious; any failure in cognitive reasoning was likely subconscious. The same can be said of Gavin and the large blockers. Gregory himself was very active in debating this issue on Reddit, and he became one of the most derided figures in the space. Gregory considered the Bitcoin development process as highly complex and scientific, with many challenging technical trade-offs. He did not welcome the involvement of what he considered the uninformed masses in the decision-making process, likening them to “beer cup hat” spectators at a racing event making decisions about how to engineer the racing cars. Pulling in a car analogy, you have a pit crew that just added hardened pistons, closed loop anti-knock sensing fuel-air mixture control, nitrous, and recently invented and is planning on building the turbo-charger, all while also contributing to maintaining track and painting the car (which happen to be some of their most visible activities; because they're easy to explain). and while they’re busily debating compression ratios and high octane fuel and the seeming impossibility of getting the car to safely go much faster with the current state of technology you have a guy standing on the sidelines with a beer cup hat, saying "No problem guys: lets remove the breaks!" and the crowd goes wild: Finally someone who cares about speed.[27] Gregory earned the nickname “One Meg Greg” due to his support for smaller blocks, and was perhaps more detested by the large blockers than anybody else. As someone fascinated by the blocksize debate, given the players attending, I felt that I simply had to attend the conference in Canada. I thought that perhaps Gavin and Gregory would discuss things in the open and make progress towards resolving the conflict, and this is something I was keen to witness. At the time, I worked in London for an investment management company called Ruffer. I had limited holiday left and couldn’t really take more time off work. However, the conference was over the weekend. I devised a plan to quickly fly in and out, attend the conference and barely miss any work. I took the 6.45pm flight out of London on a Friday, landing in Montreal at 8.50pm local time. Then, I returned home on a night flight, departing Montreal at 10.35pm on the Sunday, arriving in London at 10.10am on the Monday, where I could head straight from the airport to work. I would miss just a couple of hours work on a Friday evening and then arrive a bit late on the Monday: perfect. I considered explaining myself to my colleagues at the office and asking for more time off. After all, it was an investment company and this trip could be classified as investment research. I therefore would not need such an intense schedule. Ruffer was a macro investment house, known for accurately predicting and profiting from the 2008 global financial crisis. The company appeared to be perpetually worried about the risk of high inflation, driven by monetary easing from central bankers and the prospect of large fiscal deficits. The investment team did seem highly intelligent, curious and open to new ideas. Many people in the company were also highly knowledgeable of monetary history. Indeed, during my first week at the company, one of the senior team had pulled me aside into a room and asked how I would define money. Bitcoin therefore seemed like a potential fit for Ruffer, at least one day. However, a couple of years earlier, in 2012 and 2013, I had talked extensively about Bitcoin to some of my colleagues. Although everyone was always polite and respectful, I thought the overall impression was somewhat negative. It was probably best not to mention this trip, so I chose the path of an intense two-day trip to Canada, rather than the more relaxed schedule of an official business trip. Little did I know then, but almost exactly five years after this conference, when the blocksize war was nothing but ancient history fading from memory, Ruffer would purchase around US$700 million worth of Bitcoin for its clients (around 2.5 percent of client portfolios). This would prove to be a monumental moment for the ecosystem, especially in the UK. A highly respected and conservative organisation like Ruffer purchasing Bitcoin had a significant impact on how the financial establishment perceived the coin. I arrived at my hotel in Canada, which was a short walk from the conference venue, at around 2am on Saturday, local time. I was extremely tired, but still managed to listen to an hour-long podcast about the blocksize conflict, a debate between Gavin and Adam Back.[28]Adam was the only person referenced in the main text of the Bitcoin whitepaper for his Hashcash concept in 1997, and he eventually became one of the leading characters on the smaller block side of the debate. Adam was the president of Blockstream. At this time, Adam appeared to take a more moderate stance than Gavin, offering his support for the idea of increasing the blocksize limit to 2 MB, then 4 MB and then 8 MB, with two-year time gaps between the changes (BIP 248). This didn’t seem too far away from what Gavin wanted, except Adam opposed the continued increases to 8,000 MB that Gavin supported. On the podcast, I remember Gavin commenting that Satoshi had said nodes could be operated in data centres processing many transactions. Adam argued back that mining was now more centralised than under Satoshi’s time. This mining centralisation meant that the balance had shifted: users running nodes to validate the rules and keep the network decentralised was now more important than it was before. It is important to realise that, when Satoshi was active in the space, there was no real distinction between validating nodes and mining nodes. They were essentially the same thing. By 2015, things had changed; there were now specialised mining farms. I arrived at the conference venue at 8am on Saturday and there were a few hundred guests in attendance. The atmosphere was calm and quiet. Most people didn’t seem to know each other and, like me, considered themselves curious observers in this dispute, rather than participants. There did genuinely appear to be a good mix of people on either side of the debate, and I felt the event was helpful and productive. Most of the talks focused on the computer science of scaling Bitcoin, with a particular emphasis on the scientific method and any analysis which contained data and statistics around the technical limits of the network. The main organiser of the event appeared to be Pindar Wong, a former ICANN Board member, with an expertise in internet governance, who had also been behind one of the world’s first ISPs. Much of the focus at the conference was on learning lessons from governance disputes at internet bodies such as the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) and potentially applying these lessons to Bitcoin. There were two talks that stood out the most to me: one by Peter Rizun on blocksize economics, and another from Jeff Garzik on various blocksize limit proposals. Peter’s talk centred on the economic theory behind the blocksize limit. He believed that the fee market death spiral argument did not apply as, without a blocksize limit, one could have a functioning transaction fee market. However, he did state that non-zero inflation was an assumption in his theory, which is fine if one has a short to medium-term outlook. For those focused on the long-term sustainability of the system, this assumption may not have seemed appropriate. Peter regarded the blocksize limit as a production quota, which is an impediment to a free market, which he claimed would determine transaction fees in a more efficient manner. Peter ended his speech by referencing censorship on the Bitcoin Reddit of those who advocated removing the production quota and DDoS attacks on clients and mining pools that supported removing the quota, such as Bitcoin XT and Slushpool respectively. Peter also mentioned nodes supporting the production quota slipping away. He showed pie charts on screen illustrating that two percent of nodes on the Bitcoin network were running Bitcoin XT on August 15, 2015, a figure that increased to 15 percent by August 30, 2015. Peter then predicted this production quota would fail. Bitcoin will break down dams erected by special interest groups attempting to block the stream of transactions. That’s all I have to say about the transaction fee market.[29] The above phrase about a “stream” was clearly a reference to Blockstream, and this comment attracted considerable laughter in the audience. There were mutters by some of the more sensitive small blockers that this was trolling, and violating the collaborative spirit of the conference. The other speech worth mentioning here is Jeff Garzik’s talk entitled “Issues Impacting Block Size Proposals”. Jeff was another early Bitcoin developer, who had proposed removing the blocksize limit a few weeks after it was added in 2010, as was mentioned in Chapter 2. Despite this, Jeff had always come across as somewhat of a moderate on the blocksize issue, often articulating both sides of the argument. He appeared to be trying to position himself as someone capable of bridging the gap between both sides, and he never appeared to support Bitcoin XT. However, he did seem keen on making some sort of decision, sooner rather than later, and did not have the patience of the small blockers. Jeff emphasised in his talk that the 1 MB limit was very much a marketing problem that would deter companies from beginning their Bitcoin programs. Another problem, is what I call the Fidelity problem. Fidelity is one of many Wall Street companies looking at doing some Bitcoin experiments and they like many others say that if they switch on the switch on their Beta program, they max out Bitcoin’s capacity. So that makes the project a non starter, from the get go, as projects never get started and that growth you hope to measure never appears.[30] In the afternoon, the conference broke up into smaller groups. I was allocated into a group of five or six people, along with Gavin. Others spoke about lessons they learnt from disputes related to cryptographic protocols, such as contentious decisions on how to select a hash function. They talked about the need for dialogue and patience. The concept of “rough consensus” was discussed, a methodology used by the IETF, which involves judging the “sense of the group”. Working groups make decisions through a “rough consensus” process. IETF consensus does not require that all participants agree although this is, of course, preferred. In general, the dominant view of the working group shall prevail. (However, it must be noted that “dominance” is not to be determined on the basis of volume or persistence, but rather a more general sense of agreement.) Consensus can be determined by a show of hands, humming, or any other means on which the WG agrees (by rough consensus, of course). Note that 51% of the working group does not qualify as “rough consensus” and 99% is better than rough. It is up to the Chair to determine if rough consensus has been reached.[31] It was then Gavin’s turn to speak. He essentially said that all this talk about dialogue and patience was great, but at some point a final decision needs to be made and someone, or some process, needs to be in place to make that final decision. The trouble here, he proclaimed, is that nobody knew who or how this final decision would be made. What he said was reasonable, however I sensed he was becoming more frustrated and losing patience. This is no surprise given the immense pressure he must have been under, as one of the people everyone was focused on. I had the utmost respect for Gavin at the time, for his willingness to participate in this discussion process, when the easier thing to do would have been to not bother attending at all, which is the path Mike Hearn had chosen. This conference was the first time I met Gregory in person. From reading his posts online, I got the impression that he was exceptionally intelligent, a strong personality, a fast thinker and somewhat impatient and intolerant of those with a weak technical understanding of some concepts in computer science or Bitcoin. I was surprised by his persona in the flesh; he seemed calm, curious, polite, thoughtful and open-minded, a very different Gregory than one would have expected. In the corridors of the conference, during one of the break sessions, I noticed that Gavin and Gregory sat near each other and started talking. This is what many attendees had hoped to see: the main protagonists on each side discussing the issue. As time progressed, the group witnessing the discussion got larger and larger as more wanted to hear what was being said. The conversation seemed quite tangential to the issues and then became slower. Both parties seemed very uncomfortable, especially Gregory. His preferred discussion format was clearly web forums, where the conversation was open to everyone to view. Something as critical as the Bitcoin protocol should not be discussed in this kind of closed format, at least if any decisions were to be made. Therefore, the conversation ended pretty fast and not much of substance was said. The format and framing of the conference was certainly tilted towards the small blocker vision for how things should evolve. There was emphasis on science and discussion, rather than making any decisions. The scientific merit format was certainly how many small blockers wanted the space to evolve. Large blockers seemed to favour a more business-like approach; they did not regard Bitcoin as some theoretical science project, but a real world, live system, with real users. In general, large blockers were active users of Bitcoin and they wanted to make their usage easier, without being hampered by theoretical computer scientists they perceived as not even using Bitcoin. Large blockers accused the conference organisers of making the issue too complicated and using the event as a stalling tactic, to buy time. They cynically renamed the Scaling Bitcoin conference series as “Stalling Bitcoin”.

4

Scaling II - Hong Kong A few months after Scaling I, phase two of the Scaling conference series took place in Hong Kong on December 6 and 7, 2015. Hong Kong was chosen due to the close proximity to China, where many Bitcoin miners were based. A lack of engagement between the miners and developers was considered a major problem at the time, and the location was designed to address this concern. As it happens, by this point I had decided to resign from Ruffer and move to Hong Kong, so the timing and location of this conference was very convenient for me. I used the opportunity to find an apartment in the city and had a full week in the region. Hong Kong would later emerge as one of the key battlegrounds in this conflict and, if one wanted to witness this war unfold, it was certainly a good place to be. The conference took place in Cyberport, a business park on the West side of Hong Kong island, overlooking the ocean. The Cyberport project had been controversial in Hong Kong. It was meant to be a technology and startup hub for the city, which is why the project was approved. However, not many technology companies had located there, with most of the vast space left empty, leading to accusations it was a housing development in disguise. The government granted the development project to Pacific Century Group, a company controlled by Richard Li, the son of Hong Kong property tycoon Li Ka-Shing. Controversially, this project was awarded without an open tender, which led to accusations of impropriety.[32]You may think we are going into too much detail here, but amazingly it is the basis of conspiracy theories by some of the most extreme large blockers. Horizon Ventures, Li Ka-Shing’s VC firm, had invested in Blockstream and therefore this association with Cyberport was cited as evidence of an establishment plot to cripple Bitcoin and keep the blocksize small. The same was said about the French insurer AXA, whose venture arm also invested in Blockstream. The former CEO of AXA was Henri de Castries, chairman of the steering group for the Bilderberg meeting, a closed-door gathering of the world’s financial and political elites, which provided perfect material for conspiracy theorists. These deranged and stupid theories were repeated again and again on /r/btc. The atmosphere in Hong Kong felt much livelier and more intense than Montreal. Tensions were significantly higher. It also felt less productive and less useful than Montreal. It did not feel like there was much useful dialogue and discussion going on between the two sides at this conference; just arguments and clashes, mostly people speaking at each other. On the first evening, at the opening party, I tried to get a sense of the mood of the crowd. This was a much larger event than the one in Montreal, with a wider spectrum of people. The mood was very optimistic: the overwhelming majority of people were large blockers who expected the issue to be resolved in a few months, with a blocksize limit increase. Most people seemed to think the arguments in favour of small blocks were being gradually defeated and that only a tiny minority opposed a hardfork blocksize limit increase. As for the sessions themselves, just like in Montreal it was mostly technical. A key difference between Montreal and this conference was the presence of the miners. One of the most anticipated sessions was the mining panel on the Saturday afternoon.[33]There were seven people on stage representing the mining industry. Many of them were Chinese speakers, and China was regarded as having around 65 percent of the global hashrate at the time. The session started with a question about whether they supported a blocksize limit increase. Most people responded yes, however some gave qualifications such as it’s best to proceed with caution, or that dialogue between China and the West needs to improve. Much of the translation from Chinese to English was conducted by Bobby Lee, who at the time was the CEO and founder of the BTCC exchange. Bobby was an enthusiastic proponent of Bitcoin and had been one of the key promoters of Bitcoin in China. The two proposals that were discussed on the panel were BIP 101 (implemented by Bitcoin XT) and BIP 100 (a proposal by Jeff Garzik allowing miners to vote on what the blocksize limit should be). Most of the miners indicated a preference for BIP 100, rather than BIP 101. This is perhaps no surprise, as BIP 100 gave more discretionary power to the miners. Wang Chung, the operator of one of the larger mining pools, F2Pool, said that miners are the only party that could vote and therefore miners would decide. Bitcoin is a proof-of-work system, he argued, and there is no mechanism for anyone else to vote. However, he went on to say that an 8 MB blocksize limit was too large, as it would take too long to sync a node, which he said would be a disaster. Most miners seemed to agree that they were in control of the network and that it was their decision, however they believed they did not have enough information available to make the right decision. In general, the smaller blockers did not believe the miners had decision-making power over the Bitcoin protocol, and that end users either did, or should, control the network. Proof of work was there to solve the double spending problem, they contended; miners merely decide on the order of transactions. However, most miners believed this decision was theirs; partly because of bias, as people tend to want more power, but also because they were being lobbied by both sides. After all, why would they be the ones being lobbied and being asked to vote, if the decision was not theirs to make? As to whether miners actually had this power or not, it wasn’t totally clear. Staunch small blockers would argue that miners never had such an ability, as they would never accept Bitcoin XT coins, while others believed that if the 75 percent activation threshold was reached, Bitcoin XT would become the new Bitcoin, as Bitcoin XT would be the “most work” chain. It was this most work concept that controlled Bitcoin governance, in their view, and users would rally behind the majority hashrate. In a way, each side was correct, based on their assumptions that users would behave like them. If Bitcoin XT reached the 75 percent threshold and then everyone upgraded to the larger block client, then there would be one new, larger block Bitcoin. However, if users refused to upgrade, then the original chain would persist and miners would not be in control. The trouble here is that most people assumed that other users would behave the same as themselves, without considering that they may act differently. After the mining panel, there was another discussion with miners, in a side room. This was a round table-type discussion, rather than being on stage. As far as I am aware, this session was not an official part of the conference. This was what many of the conference attendees had wanted to see and, as this session progressed, the small room eventually became crammed with people as everyone frantically made their way there. There was perhaps 80 people eventually squashed into the room; it was standing room only. In this second meeting, some miners appeared to say they wanted to work together with Bitcoin developers and agree on a solution. However, years after the event, I was informed that the message was not as collaborative as this; it was more assertive about miners controlling the protocol. The message had supposedly been lost in translation, as the translator wanted to try and help resolve the situation, rather than make the conversation difficult and confrontational. Apparently, one of the miners had said that they have real businesses, they invested real money and they produce the blocks, giving them real power over the network, while the developers had no such influence. Now feels like an appropriate time to introduce Roger Ver to the story, as he was in attendance at the conference. Roger describes himself as the first investor in Bitcoin startups. He certainly had a successful investment track record in the space, backing companies such as Blockchain.info, Bitpay and Kraken. Roger had been one of Bitcoin’s most prominent and relentless promoters in the early days, and he had always been extremely enthusiastic about Bitcoin. When he first discovered Bitcoin, Roger is said to have been so excited by the opportunity that he was hospitalised for several days.[34]In particular, he had always been very keen on the payments use case for Bitcoin, and had been instrumental in driving adoption of Bitcoin by aggressively encouraging merchants to accept Bitcoin payments. Perhaps due to this unabated enthusiasm for Bitcoin, which was not to everyone’s taste, he earned the nickname “Bitcoin Jesus”. Prior to Bitcoin, Roger Ver had a company selling computer components, MemoryDealers.com. Prior to that, he was convicted of illegally selling explosives online in the US, something he served a prison sentence for. Roger had not spent much time in the US after his release from prison. He formally relinquished his US citizenship in 2014, and by this point he lived in Tokyo. As far as I can tell, prior to this Roger was interested in the practical and business side of Bitcoin and, prior to the blocksize war, he had little interest in the technical or computer science aspects of the system. Roger was also well known in the Bitcoin community for ensuring users of the solvency of the MtGox exchange in July 2013, after reviewing “multiple bank statements”.[35]Unfortunately, at the time MtGox was insolvent and had lost thousands of Bitcoin.[36]A few months after Roger’s assurances, in February 2014, MtGox spectacularly failed. This damaged Roger’s reputation to some extent, however people in the space have short memories and there are always waves of new joiners. Anyway, MtGox already felt like ancient history by the winter of 2015. Roger was the owner of the alternative Bitcoin subreddit, /r/btc and, given his forthright libertarian views, he was very strongly opposed to what he perceived as censorship on the main /r/bitcoin subreddit. At this point, at the conference, Roger was not known as one of the main proponents of larger blocks. Instead, he had a loud and very public altercation with the CEO of OKCoin, Star Xu, over the Bitcoin.com domain and a supposedly fraudulent contract.[37]This appeared to have something to do with Changpeng Zhao (then CTO of OKCoin), who would go on to found the extremely successful cryptocurrency exchange, Binance. We will not go into the details here, but the point is that, at the time, Roger appeared distracted by other things and was not directly involved in the blocksize argument; although it’s clear he was on the side of the larger blockers. Jeff Garzik spoke again at the conference and talked through the pros and cons of the major options, which were essentially four pathways forward: BIP 101, his BIP 100 idea, a simple one-off increase to 2 MB (BIP 102), or doing nothing. After his speech, he was asked how the decision would be made. He replied: I think it’s more of a process whereby in Montreal we did some input data stage. In Hong Kong now, we’re looking at here are all the issues, the validation costs, the various proposals et cetera. Now step 3 is you take this back, you noodle with the businesses, users, miners, then you get a rough consensus. My general response is you need to make your thoughts known. Everyone can know this is what jgarzik thinks, or this is what BitPay thinks. I think that transparency and discussion are the ways we find this. I think backroom deals, private visits to various people, that’s not the way to do it. You have to do it in public. That’s the open-source way.[38] At the end of the conference, Jeff was back on stage again. This time, he asked for audience feedback on the various proposals. He would state a proposal and if the audience agreed, they would clap. When he came to the idea of a simple increase to 2 MB, there was a large amount of applause across the venue. Around 70 percent of the delegates appeared to clapenthusiastically. However, a small minority were clearly unhappy with this process and appealed to people to stop clapping. They wanted decisions to be made on merit, not by basing it on who clapped the loudest at an event. However, most people thought this was harmless. It appeared as if the consensus view at the conference was that going beyond 2 MB was too risky for now. Many presenters, including large blocker Jonathan Toomim, had presented technical arguments as to why 2 MB was safe given the current network conditions and, if we went much higher than that, longer block propagation times could cause issues for the network. Most miners seemed to agree with this logic. After this event, there was no clear pathway forwards. However, what did seem clear to me was that Bitcoin XT was dead. The view was that 2 MB may be appropriate for now, not 8 MB. Bitcoin XT was not formally withdrawn, nor was there an acknowledgement from its proponents that they had pushed too aggressively for a limit that was too large. Such an admission may have helped resolve the situation. To the small blockers, Bitcoin XT had created a crisis situation, causing tension and controversy which made progress on the blocksize issue more difficult. While, to the large blockers, it was a necessary catalyst to get the debate going. After the conference, I went out to dinner with seven or eight people from Blockstream, off Hong Kong island, inKowloon. Most of the discussion at dinner was about highly technical subjects, such as how Bitcoin signatures could become compressed or aggregated. This discussion then moved on to Gavin and his tactics. Doesn’t Gavin realise that Bitcoiners do not like being told what to do, they pondered. People feel like they own Bitcoin and they want to be in control. Bitcoin XT was thrust on them from above, with no effort to make the users feel like they are in control, like it was their decision. From a tactical standpoint, Gavin appears to have made a big mistake here, they thought. Everyone at the table appeared to agree and was surprised by Gavin’s apparent misstep. There was still sympathy at the table; most wanted Gavin to listen to their advice and try to increase the blocksize limit again with a more collaborative approach, which left users feeling more in control of their currency. If Gavin just told users it was their choice, they would probably all just follow him, opined somebody at the table. However, it seemed as if Gavin just wouldn’t do this, as he did not believe it was the users’ choice. We took the ferry back to Hong Kong island late at night. I remember looking over the towering skyscrapers in central Hong Kong, the city that was soon to be my new home. The centre of the city is dominated by the financial services sector, or what some Bitcoiners call the legacy financial system. The sense of power projected by the buildings put this debate into perspective. We were just a few hundred people arguing in a room in Hong Kong. Was Bitcoin really that important? Would Bitcoin really be able to stand up and challenge the financial system one day? If we cannot resolve this dispute now, when only a few hundred people really care about it, what hope does Bitcoin really have? I thought about the immense pressure which would be exerted on Bitcoin by major economic and political players as Bitcoin grows. It would make what Mike and Gavin were doing look miniscule by comparison. I began to realise that the rules of the network had to be robust. It doesn’t matter who is trying to change the rules, or whether it’s a good idea or not. If Bitcoin is going to succeed, it had to be really difficult to change the rules, otherwise it would not stand up to the pressure from the main financial establishment, which would surely emerge as the value of the system increased. However, from the large blockers point of view, increasing the blocksize limit was not a change in the rules. On the contrary, it was sticking to the original vision. It was a change in the rules in a literal sense and in a computer science sense, in that the network rule would become relaxed if the blocksize limit increased. However, they thought that, if the limit persisted, then there would be a major economic change and a change in vision: we would go from non-full blocks to full blocks. However, the status quo had to be defined somehow. If Bitcoin was to succeed, there had to be dynamics in place to ensure the status quo would survive and prevail. As far as I could tell, these schelling point dynamics appeared to work around the literal technical rules of block validity. There didn't seem to be any mechanism to ensure people’s vision for the network couldn't change. Only the rules on block validity appeared hard to change, due the fact that divergence from the status quo could result in an economically costly network split. This governance system was far from perfect, and it did leave the system as potentially too inflexible, but it’s all we had that appeared to be potentially sustainable. It reminded me of a quote from Winston Churchill: “Democracy is the worst form of government, except for all the others.” Perhaps a system in which the status quo rules prevail, unless there is overwhelming consensus for change, is the worst form of Bitcoin governance – except for all the others.
