# Foreword & Prologue

## Source Metadata

- Chapter number: 1
- TOC index: 1
- Part: main
- EPUB src: text/part0003.html#2RHM0-a0ba76e649554092a63ebf0e62dbbf4e
- Extraction mode: spine-range

## Extracted Text

The pandemic of 2020 upended the economy of the world, forcing 10 years of digital transformation into the span of months. Pure digital offerings exploded in popularity and many conventional brick-and-mortar services came to a halt. Millions of businesses and billions of people found themselves caught amid the greatest disruption of their lives.

During the second quarter of 2020, our business scrambled to adapt to the new constraints of a post-COVID world. The result was a streamlined enterprise software company with half a billion in cash and more on the way. Our immediate business challenge was resolved, but a larger threat to our survival loomed in the distance.

The United States government’s policy response to the pandemic was to triple the rate of monetary inflation. In essence, the cost of capital exceeded 20 percent, while the returns we could expect from any conventional treasury investment strategy were 0 percent. This made our cash stockpile and future cash flows a weight around our neck. A stable, profitable value stock growing substantially slower than the rate of monetary inflation does not serve as a store of value and rapidly loses the support of the investment community.

This problem had existed for a decade leading up the pandemic, albeit at a lower level of intensity. From 2010 through 2019, the rate of monetary inflation was approximately 7 percent and investors relentlessly pressured CEOs and CFOs to grow their cash flows in excess of this rate by any means necessary. That often meant taking on debt and using all free cash flows to buy back stock or to enter into serial acquisitions with a combination of debt and equity in order to keep revenues and expected income growing faster than this hurdle rate. The acquisitions were generally dilutive over the long term, and as management teams struggled to integrate acquisition targets, they lost focus on their core business. When each business became fully leveraged on debt, or when there were no more acquisitions to be had, it reached the end of the line.

The 7 percent hurdle rate resulted in a 99 percent mortality rate during the 20 years after our firm became public, driving one corporation after another to reach beyond their fingertips, impairing their balance sheet with too much debt and convoluting their profit and loss statements with too many disparate business units. When the hurdle rate tripled in the second quarter of 2020, it became clear that we could no longer “soldier on” with this inflationary burden hanging over our head. If we continued with business as usual, then the value created by millions of activities from thousands of employees each year would be significantly undermined by the decision of a few central bankers to print more money. The road to serfdom consists of working exponentially harder for a currency growing exponentially weaker.

The solution to our problem presented itself in the form of a K-shaped recovery. In essence, Wall Street recovered quickly due to monetary stimulus, while Main Street continued to deteriorate. The key to economic vitality in times of great monetary inflation is a large balance sheet of assets that appreciate faster than the rate of currency debasement. Accordingly, we set off on a search for the right asset mix to place on our balance sheet in lieu of cash and treasury bonds. It was during this search that we discovered Bitcoin and this wonderful thesis crafted by Vijay Boyapati.

The Bullish Case for Bitcoin, first published as a long-form article, represents an intellectual tour de force delivered with elegance and prescience by a polymath well-versed in mathematics, computer science, economics, philosophy, politics, and engineering. After March of 2020, it was evident to me that the world needed a new money based on technology. However, in February 2018, when Boyapati first published his paper, this insight required much greater perspicacity, courage, and conviction.

In a clear and concise manner, Boyapati presents the theory of money, the anatomy of Bitcoin, the reasons it is superior to the gold and fiat standards that came before it, and the promise that it offers to human civilization. He describes path dependence and the trajectory of a newly monetizing asset in terms the layman can understand, and he addresses the concerns that most commonly arise as newcomers struggle to comprehend the essence and significance of this first digital monetary network. I was immediately captivated by “The Bullish Case for Bitcoin” when I first read it and made it part of the recommended reading for all the officers and directors of my firm as we educated ourselves on Bitcoin and considered the logical path forward. In this book Boyapati updates and significantly expands on the ideas presented in his original article.

In the third quarter of 2020, MicroStrategy decided to adopt Bitcoin as our primary treasury reserve asset, becoming the first publicly traded company to convert to a Bitcoin Standard, and we eventually acquired billions of dollars’ worth of Bitcoin. We recommendThe Bullish Case for Bitcoin to any of our employees, shareholders, or constituents wishing to understand the premise and promise of Bitcoin, both as a digital treasury asset and as the world’s first digital monetary network. I hope you benefit from this work as much as we did.

Michael J. Saylor, Chairman and CEO MicroStrategy Miami Beach, Florida March 27, 2021

## Prometheus

The mysterious origins of Bitcoin seem too improbable to be real. While the full details may never be known, we know they went something like this: on January 3, 2009, an unidentified person in an unknown location tapped a key on a computer keyboard and initiated one of the most important programs in history. The computer began searching for a particular pattern known as a hash, a digital needle in a haystack, that would secure the first block in a ledger of financial transactions now known as the blockchain. Within a few minutes or hours—no one knows for sure how long—the first hash was found, thereby completing the genesis block and bringing to life the world’s first truly decentralized digital currency. Remarkably, the identity of the enigmatic figure who created Bitcoin remains unknown, even to this day. All we know is their pseudonym: Satoshi Nakamoto.

Barely two months earlier, on October 31, 2008, Nakamoto had announced a technical specification for Bitcoin to the cryptography mailing list, an email list for people interested in the study of codes and code-breaking.1 Many of the members of the list referred to themselves as cypherpunks and were determined to reshape society and liberate it from the state using the privacy-enhancing tools of cryptography. Nakamoto’s email was his very first post to the list, and it received little fanfare and general skepticism after it was posted. Even among this group, steeped in the history of attempts to invent a digital currency, few understood the significance of Nakamoto’s email announcement. One exception was Hal Finney, a gifted cryptographer and computer scientist who had devoted much of his career to the creation of a digital currency and who was familiar with the inherent difficulties of doing so. Of the announcement of Bitcoin, Finney later recounted:

When Satoshi announced Bitcoin on the cryptography mailing list, he got a skeptical reception at best. Cryptographers have seen too many grand schemes by clueless noobs. They tend to have a knee jerk reaction.2

Finney tragically passed away on August 28, 2014 from complications of Lou Gehrig’s disease. He had made numerous important contributions to the development of a digital currency, especially to Bitcoin.

## The Gordian Knot

Ever since Tim May, a retired Intel scientist and founder of the cypherpunk movement, had presented The Crypto Anarchist Manifesto to a small gathering of like-minded radicals in Silicon Valley in 1992, cypherpunks had understood the critical importance of developing a digital, stateless form of money. As May wrote in his manifesto:

Computer technology is on the verge of providing the ability for individuals and groups to communicate and interact with each other in a totally anonymous manner. Two persons may exchange messages, conduct business, and negotiate electronic contracts without ever knowing the True Name, or legal identity, of the other.3

Yet for business to be conducted, money is required. Money is the most important good in any developed economy because it acts as the foundation for all trade and savings. Gold, the ancient and venerable precious metal, had served this role for millennia, but its physicality was an Achilles’ heel that made it vulnerable to centralization, confiscation, and state attack. Gold’s status as global money was eventually repealed during the twentieth century as the state came to dominate the issuance and management of money. With a desire to facilitate anonymous payments and to overcome the vulnerabilities of gold, cypherpunks hoped to develop a digital currency that would be immune to the coercive power of the state.

In 1983, American computer scientist David Chaum published a design for eCash, which was the first attempt to create a system that protected the financial privacy of its users with cryptography. In 1989, Chaum founded a company called DigiCash to commercialize his invention, but it was never a financial success. Moreover, because eCash was tied to the company that created it, it suffered from the problem of centralization: if money is issued by a central authority, then that authority represents a single point of failure. And, indeed, the eCash system was shut down when DigiCash went bankrupt in 1998. Thus, the creation of a digital form of money that had no central authority was a key challenge occupying some of the most talented cryptographers and cypherpunks during the 1990s.

While meaningful progress on the development of digital currency was made by cypherpunks such as Adam Back, Nick Szabo, and Wei Dai during the late 90s, a crucial problem remained unsolved: how can digital scarcity be maintained when there is no central authority to enforce it? It had been recognized as early as the sixteenth century by the Spanish School of Salamanca that money’s value derives from its scarcity. However, in the digital realm, where data can be cheaply copied and transmitted, scarcity had so far only been possible through the use of state power, as in the case of intellectual property.

British cryptographer Adam Back’s HashCash system, invented in 1997, contributed a key concept that was necessary to the development of a workable system of digital scarcity: proof-of-work. Originally intended to mitigate the increasingly expensive problem of email spam, Back proposed a system whereby a computer sought for a hash that could only be found by an exhaustive search, requiring energy to be expended, hence costing money. Once produced, a hash could quickly and cheaply be verified as authentic and used as a measure of how much energy had been expended and at approximately what cost. A hash was, in essence, a cryptographic proof that work had been done. Under Back’s scheme, email senders would be required to attach a unique hash to each email to prove that some negligible cost, such as a hundredth of a penny, had been incurred. The cost would not affect regular usage but would make the ability to send spam emails en masse cost-prohibitive. Unfortunately, HashCash was not commercially successful and was missing essential elements that would allow it to function as money. Proof-of-work, however, would prove to be crucial in allowing for the coordination of untrusted parties in a decentralized system.

In 1998, American computer engineer Wei Dai proposed a system known as b-money that addressed the critical flaw of Chaum’s eCash: its centralization. Instead of requiring a central authority to maintain a limited supply of money, Dai envisaged a distributed system where participants in the network would each separately maintain a ledger of how much money each participant currently had so that state coercion of any particular participant would be ineffective. Dai’s proposal was impractical, however, in assuming that communication channels remain near-instant, connected, and untamperable. His system was never implemented.

The same year that Dai proposed b-money, American polymath Nick Szabo designed another system for digital money known as bit gold. As with b-money, bit gold was never implemented, but Szabo’s system made a critical leap forward by reframing the problem of scarcity not as the dearth of a physical substance, but as the quality of being verifiably expensive to produce. His neologism for this quality was “unforgeable costliness.” Szabo’s bit gold built upon Adam Back’s proof-of-work insight and allowed users of the system to mint tokens by providing a hash whose unforgeable costliness would act as a limiting factor to the increase in money supply. Ownership of such tokens would be tracked by a registry distributed across many computers known as a property club, somewhat resembling Dai’s b-money but differing in its functional details.

Although tantalizingly close to a solution for decentralized money, Szabo’s design suffered some important drawbacks. First, as computers continued to improve in processing power, a hash produced in the past would be easier to produce in the present, meaning that hashes produced at different points in time would not be equivalent in perceived value, breaking an important property of money called fungibility. Thus, bit gold would create a digital commodity more akin to diamonds—irregular in shape and quality and not easily interchangeable with each other—than to gold. Secondly, the concept of an ownership registry was vulnerable to Sybil attacks that would subvert the system by creating numerous fake property-club members who could then report false balances, crediting the attacker with money they did not have. While Szabo devised solutions to these problems, they were complex, and bit gold remained only theoretical.

As one century gave way to the next, hope dwindled in the cypherpunk dream for a decentralized digital currency. Hal Finney, who had paid close attention to each of the attempts to create a stateless form of money, attempted to resurrect the dream in 2004 when he designed a system known as RPOW (Reusable Proofs of Work) that was a simplified version of Szabo’s bit gold. Unlike Szabo or Dai, Finney implemented a working prototype of his system, but RPOW suffered from a similar problem to Chaum’s eCash by relying on a central authority. Finney attempted to mitigate the problem of centralization by replacing the central authority with an untamperable hardware device that could remotely attest to the correct balance information for users in the system. The hardware device would be more trustworthy than a coercible company, but it could still easily be turned off.

By 2008, as the world plunged into the worst economic crisis in generations, most members of the cryptography mailing list had concluded that creating a decentralized digital currency was probably impossible. Accordingly, when Satoshi Nakamoto confidently announced that he had solved the problems of decentralized money, very few members of the list took him seriously.

## The Breakthrough

A few weeks after the announcement of Bitcoin, Hal Finney began peppering Satoshi Nakamoto with questions about his new invention. Finney had quickly recognized the brilliance of Bitcoin and the ingenious imaginative leap Nakamoto had made to create a new form of digital money with no central point of authority. None of the component ideas of Bitcoin were new, nor was any of the cryptography novel, but Nakamoto had arranged the system in a perfect balance of economic incentives and cryptographic guarantees.

As part of his design, Nakamoto had solved a fundamental problem of computer science, first posed in the late 1970s, known as the Byzantine Generals Problem: how can disparate parties that do not trust each other and may even be antagonistic coordinate to achieve a shared goal, without relying on a mutually trusted intermediary? As Nick Szabo explained in 2011:

Nakamoto improved a significant security shortcoming that my design [of bit gold] had, namely by requiring a proof-of-work to be a node in the Byzantine-resilient peer-to-peer system to lessen the threat of an untrustworthy party controlling the majority of nodes and thus corrupting a number of important security features. Yet another feature obvious in hindsight, quite non-obvious in foresight.4

It was a major technical breakthrough, and although it was not immediately obvious to most members of the cryptography mailing list on October 31, 2008, Satoshi Nakamoto’s invention would eventually change the world.
