# Why Money Does Not Need the State

## Source Metadata

- Chapter number: 2
- TOC index: 8
- Part: main
- EPUB src: text/part0007.html
- Extraction mode: single-source

## Extracted Text

1. Why money does not need the state “The people will miss those resources in the future that they ate up over the decades.” - Roland Baader Right from the outset, we would like to clear up a widely held misconception: money was not invented by any one person in particular, and it certainly did not appear as the result of some government decree. Most people know that money is very important, and they believe that it is right and good that the government controls it. Wrong! Forget for a moment our current monetary system, which we described in the introduction as bad money. Instead, let’s begin at the beginning. First, using a simple story, we would like to explain to you how money originally arose. The origin of money illustrates its true nature and shows us what good money is. And when you understand the nature of money, you are ahead of most economists, not to mention most of our politicians. Imagine a society withoutmoney. How would trade among people take place? Let’s take a trip back in time to a small imaginary city. How far back, we’ll leave to your imagination. Imagine that you live in a small city and you are a shoemaker. You make the best shoes in the area. Unfortunately you don’t have any other talents. Neither you nor your wife can bake bread well. You also don’t have any room to keep farm animals. Your children and your wife are widely admired for the shoes they wear. But you can’t eat shoes, and thus, from time to time, your wife has to go out and procure foodstuffs. But because money does not yet exist and you only have shoes to offer in trade, your wife is forced to find a farmer who — by chance — needs shoes and is willing to exchange a bag of potatoes or a ham for a pair of shoes. This may work once or twice, but at some point, the farmer does not need any more shoes; his shoe closet is full. When your wife comes by again to exchange shoes for food, the farmer will politely decline her offer. Let us stop for a moment. Did you notice that we used the word “exchange”? People need a “means of exchange.” Our simple example would get more complicated if we included additional professions: a butcher, a blacksmith, a bricklayer. (But notice: no banker! He is not needed here.) How much more could all these people — we will call them market participants — benefit from one another, if they had a means of exchange so that they would not always have to be on the lookout for someone who right then is in need of what they have to offer (whether a pair of shoes, or some dental work, or a plough)? Did you perhaps think to yourself how great it is that we don’t have these practical problems, since we have money that is supplied to us by a generous state? If so, we would like to free you from this misapprehension and continue with the rest of our story. The people in our small city like to adorn themselves with jewelry, particularly gold and silver. It is a long tradition that the men give their wives gifts of gold at every opportunity, when a child is born, when there is a birthday, and at anniversaries. The women in the city love these presents, but they also know how long their men have to work and how much of their goods or services they have to hand over to the goldsmith to obtain a ring, an earring, or a necklace. But gold is not just a status symbol. Its aesthetic qualities are also indisputable. Gold shines so nicely. Don’t you agree? For that reason, in our society, everyone views gold jewelry as something valuable. It is valued. In the meantime, in order to find someone who will exchange potatoes for shoes your wife has again walked so much that she has blisters on her feet — despite her good shoes. She has noticed that small pieces of gold are greatly desired. Pieces of gold are often traded, and people are willing to exchange them for any number of other goods. Or expressed a different way: Gold is a very marketable good. It can be exchanged at a favorable rate almost any time. So why not trade the shoes for pieces of gold? One day, your wife gets a bright new idea. Instead of trying to exchange shoes directly for potatoes, she could first trade the shoes for gold and then seek out a potato seller willing to accept her newly acquired gold. Thus, your wife needs, instead of one exchange (shoes for potatoes), two exchange transactions (shoes for gold, then gold for potatoes), but in doing so she could gain valuable time and thereby obtain the desired potatoes with less trouble and effort. Now, perhaps the attempt fails and she is unable to find anyone who will exchange gold for shoes or potatoes for gold. But your wife risks it. Let us assume that your wife is successful. She obtains the potatoes faster and cheaper by means of an indirect exchange using gold as the intermediate good (medium of exchange). The innovation was successful! From now on, your wife will use this system of exchange for all her undertakings. She will demand gold pieces to be used in exchange. But it is not just your wife who will change her behavior; others will imitate her. Due to the increased demand from market participants, the marketability of gold increases. This happens because, at her next get-together over coffee, your wife will explain to her friends about her successful “gold-for-potatoes” exchange. As chance has it, a farmer’s wife is in attendance. She also has a story to tell. Her husband used the gold that he received from your wife together with some gold from her jewelry case to acquire a new plow from the local smith. The transaction was much easier than usual, since the smith was happy to take the gold. Normally, the smith has such an overabundance of potatoes and hams from exchanges with farmers that he cannot consume all of it before it goes bad, and thus he had no interest in making more plows for farmers. Word of the new way to exchange goods and services spreads around our small city. More and more, people use gold as an intermediate good rather than exchange goods they have directly for goods they want. Through this, the demand for gold rises and gold becomes more marketable. In other words, it gets more liquid. It becomes a better means of exchange the more market participants demand it and use it — this is a self-reinforcing process. People notice that everyone benefits. They can cooperate more easily, and the division of labor is promoted. Everyone is suddenly relieved of the need to do all the work themselves: each person can concentrate on his or her specific talents instead of spending precious time searching for specific items to exchange. Everyone can more easily benefit from the abilities of others. Previously, this only took place when someone else required exactly the good or service that another person was ready to offer at the time. With the use of indirect trade, the division of labor can now expand considerably, to the well-being of all. The monetary system is thus important because the manipulation of it can have a dramatic effect on people’s lives and wealth, and because — as Germany’s hyperinflation in the Weimar Republic in the 1920s demonstrated — if the monetary system collapses, it is a certainty that the rest of society will also be shaken to its core. Without the use of money, our highly complex economy with its sophisticated division of labor could not be maintained. The division of labor allows for enormous productivity, which in turn allows us to feed a world population of some seven billion people. Without the use of money, most of the current trade in goods and services could not take place, the division of labor would collapse, and people would be forced to attempt to produce everything they needed themselves. The loss of productivity and well-being would be unimaginable. Without a functioning money, the majority of the current population would likely die of hunger and disease. The emergence of money, i.e., a generally acceptable means of exchange, allowed us to establish a complex division of labor and helped the rise of wealthy societies. Stated another way: without money, there can be no civilization. We should celebrate as heroes those who contributed to the adoption of some goods as money. Yes, exactly. Your imaginary wife is a hero. Can we agree that in our small mythical city, money has arisen? And did you notice that no state was involved, that no government enacted a law that made gold money? Money arose spontaneously in the market place because the market participants who wanted to engage in commerce noticed how useful this was for them. They did not even consciously intend to create money. Rather, with a monetary good as their means of exchange, they were able to achieve their personal goals better. And because everyone used the same means of exchange — gold — this good became more useful. Money thus has a main function as a medium of exchange. But it also has other functions, such it is also a store of value and can be used as a unit of account.4 Money can only fulfill its function of holding purchasing power and transporting it into the future if its value is stable. This is because, between the time when your wife sells the shoes for gold, and the time at which you use the gold for purchases, months may go by. Your wife decided in favor of accepting gold pieces in trade because she assumed that they would retain their value during the time in-between transactions. Marketability and value retention go hand in hand. Gold was often used in trade because it was a good store of value. And its frequent use in trade made its value more stable. A monetary order that arises naturally, that is, without intervention by a state or government, is referred to as a market monetary system. It arises without any state coercion. The market participants agree voluntarilyon the use of certain goods as money, or on multiple goods used side by side. In history, many different goods have been used for this purpose, but eventually market participants tended to settle on gold, silver, or copper. You may have seen old coins in museums, created long before the birth of Christ. If paper money had been in use at the time, the passage of time would have caused most of it to crumple to dust by now. And if there were any paper notes still around, they would only have historical value for collectors. Old coins at least have the value of the metal in them! What is the reason people throughout history have repeatedly chosen precious metals as money? (Provided no one forced them to use state-issued money.) Going back in time, when we look at commodity money we find that in the beginning goods used for this purpose were simply regular trade goods (commodities). And because these goods were frequently traded, just as in our story, they suddenly became money or commodity money, entirely without the involvement of any government or state authority. But what characterizes this money (which we will call good money)? While market participants may have started out using grain or fish for this purpose, why did they tend over time to gravitate towards the use of gold or silver? Very simply: precious metals are rare, divisible, homogenous, cheap to transport and store, non-perishable, relatively easy to recognize and very long lasting. They are constantly in high demand and — above all — cannot easily be duplicated or falsified. (The famous bite into the gold coin we all know from western films.) In an economy in which there is good money — we will assume it is gold — the quantity of money will only increase when new gold is found. And getting gold out of the ground can only be done with great time and effort. The greatest advantage of gold is that the amount people have dug up since the beginning of time is enormous in relation to the annual production of new gold. In contrast to other goods such as wheat, the yearly gold production is not consumed, rather it accumulates continually. In the past 150 years, the worldwide quantity of mined gold has grown by about 2% per year on average. That is not a lot, and this growth rate has been fairly constant. What is notconstant is the rate at which the available quantity of money in our current money system is growing. After the introduction of the euro, there were years in which, according to the European Central Bank, the M3 money supply grew by 12%! In the U.S., M3 growth was even higher, reaching 17% in 2008. The M3 money supply is the broadest one; it includes — in addition to cash and demand deposits — longer term time deposits and money market funds. That such high rates of growth are not good for the purchasing power of money, i.e., of your money, you can imagine. We will return to this topic in a later chapter. As you may already suspect, if there is such a thing as good money, then there is also bad money. Let us listen to someone who ought to know a lot about money, because he is the president of the German Bundesbank (the German central bank), Dr. Jens Weidmann. In a speech he gave in September 2012, which drew a lot of attention, he said: “The money that we carry in the form of bank notes and coins [he meant the euro — comment by the authors] has nothing to do anymore with commodity money. There has been no direct connection to gold since the U.S. dollar lost its link to gold in 1971. In short: Modern money is not backed by any physical asset anymore. Bank notes are printed paper — those knowledgeable among you know that in the case of the euro, it is cotton, while coins are formed metal. That bank notes and coins are accepted as a means of payment in daily life is partly due to the fact that they are the solelegalmeans of payment. In the end, the acceptance of paper money primarily is based on the population trusting that they will be able to make purchases later with the paper money that they have.” You read it yourself: “… has nothing to do anymore with commodity money … not backed by any physical asset anymore … based on the trust of the population.” Interesting, isn’t it? The president of the German central bank admits that there are no physical assets behind our money and that the value of our money is solely based on trust. Many Germans remember the fall of 2008, when the Hypo Real Estate Bank was threatened with bankruptcy. People began to lose trust in the monetary system and were withdrawing money from their bank accounts. German Chancellor Angela Merkel and her finance minister at the time, Peer Steinbrück, felt obliged to make a promise to the German people that their savings were safe. Merkel said at the time, “We say to savers, your deposits are safe.” What kind of money is this that politicians have to make such promises guaranteeing its value? The answer is simple: bad money. And you can answer the following question yourself without hesitation: do you believe that good money or commodity money is dependent on the guarantees of politicians? We say no. The money that we use today is bad money and is not based on a voluntary agreement among people. Our monetary system is a pure paper money system. In fact, all currencies worldwide are now pure paper currencies. The last link money had to gold was cut in 1971 when the American president, Richard Nixon, suspended the convertibility of dollars into gold for foreign central banks. (At the time, the exchange value of the dollar was 35 U.S. dollars to an ounce of gold.) Due to increasing indebtedness by the U.S. government, caused to a large extent by the war in Vietnam, mistrust in the dollar grew, and as a result more and more gold was being withdrawn from the vaults of the U.S. central bank. To prevent this, the U.S. government felt it had no alternative other than to suspend the convertibility of the dollar. As another option to try to regain lost trust in the currency, the government could have tried to reduce spending. But states and governments really dislike fiscal discipline. They greatly prefer distributing money that is not theirs (collected through taxes) to having to tell recipients of government funds that those benefits will have to be reduced! But back to our topic: today, the state has monetary sovereignty, a monopoly on the creation of money. And monopolies are bad for the consumer, but not for the monopolist. For any other product, consumers would complain about the monopoly position of the producer. But no one does when it comes to money! Why is that? Have you ever asked yourself why the government is responsible for our money? Probably not. When people are asked how much trust they have in their politicians, the results are regularly shocking — at least for German politicians. If the Emnid survey from August 2013 is true, about two-thirds of Germans have no faith at all in their politicians. How interesting then that when it comes to managing money, we give the responsibility to exactly this professional group! The common man is a bit schizophrenic: we don’t trust the politicians, but we expect them to provide us with good money. And when a crisis arises and we begin to lose trust in the money, we still trust what politicians say, namely that our savings are safe. This does not make much sense … Today, we are capable of incredible technological achievements. We send robot probes to land on Mars and we have smartphones that allow us to send a photo halfway around the world in an instant. Our doctors regularly transplant donated organs. We order things on the Internet in seconds, and — due to masterful logistical achievements — they land on our doorsteps the next day. However, when the discussion turns to monetary arrangements, we seem to regularly turn off our reasoning abilities. We don’t even question our current monetary system, and leave the management of it to politicians we don’t trust. We thus hand over the care of our money to people who are apparently unable to even build an airport on time (as shown in the construction of a new airport in Berlin, which has been the subject of embarrassing and costly delays), or keep our highway bridges from falling down, or replace the ancient computer systems operated by the IRS and the FAA in a timely manner. But when the subject is money, the same politicians supposedly really know their stuff! Admittedly, the functioning of our modern monetary system is anything but simple. In addition, it is hidden behind a smokescreen intentionally created so that the normal citizen does not recognize exactly how it works, and thus does not question it. But that is what this book is for — to help you see through the fog. No one said it better than Ludwig von Mises’s student and Nobel Prize winner Friedrich August von Hayek (1899–1992), who wrote in the 1970s that the history of the government’s dealings with money is a history of “incessant fraud and deception.” We have seen that for a monetary system to work it is not necessary for the state to be involved. And the notion that it is necessary and important to have a legally prescribed means of payment is also not true. History has clearly shown that people can voluntarily agree on what goods they will use as money. They simply need to be left alone for that to happen. Perhaps you will argue that times are different today, and that a modern economy needs additional money and credit in order to grow. We hear this argument a lot from economists as well as from those who work for the central bank. This claim is also false! An economy will adapt to any quantity of money. More money does not make an economy richer — it just results in higher prices. Economist Murray N. Rothbard (1926–1995), also a student of Mises’s, wrote in his book What Has Government Done to Our Money?: “What would happen if, overnight, some good fairy slipped into pockets, purses, and bank vaults, and doubled our supply of money ... Would we be twice as rich? Obviously not. What makes us rich is an abundance of goods, and what limits that abundance is a scarcity of resources: namely land, labor, and capital. Multiplying coin will not whisk these resources into being. We may feel twice as rich for the moment, but clearly all we are doing is diluting the money supply ... Whereas new consumer or capital goods add to standards of living, new money only raises prices.” Another error that needs to be done away with is this one: that the more stable the money, the better, and therefore it is a necessary task for the central bank to stabilize the price level. False! Why, you may ask, does the Fed view it as its task to keep prices stable? A counter-question: why does the central bank prevent prices from falling? Just to be clear, we have nothing against falling prices. How about you? But the central bank seems to. Why? Because in a paper money system, falling prices have destructive effects. You will see the reasons as this book progresses. The purchasing power of commodity money would certainly be more stable than that of our current paper money, and the trend would no doubt be toward more stability. But the purchasing power of commodity money would not be absolutely stable. It would also have swings in value, because it would be closely tied to the fluctuating demand for the monetary commodity (e.g., gold). Sometimes the demand for gold is higher and sometimes lower. Think about it: In times of economic uncertainty, people will want to keep more money, the demand for money will rise, and goods prices will fall — up to the point at which goods prices are again viewed as attractive, uncertainty again declines, and the readiness to exchange money for goods increases. In times when there is little uncertainty, people will hold less money, the demand for money will be lower, and the prices of goods will tend to rise — up to the point at which they are viewed as too high, and the willingness to exchange money for goods falls again. The central bank, with its self-appointed goal of keeping prices stable, does not allow these natural fluctuations to happen. What it attempts to achieve is to generate the appearance of price stability, and to hide the permanent loss of purchasing power of our paper money. As an aside: the future is always uncertain, just sometimes more and sometimes less. For that reason alone it is necessary to hold at least some money. We hope that in this first chapter, we have succeeded in motivating you to question received opinion and the status quo! Summary: In the absence of state coercion, people agree voluntarily on what good(s) they will use as a means of exchange. In this competitive process, the result is some form of commodity money (good money) as the accepted means of exchange. By contrast, state provided money, which people are forced to use, and whose quantity can be changed at the drop of a bureaucrat’s hat, is bad money. Here, we would like to cite again the words of Friedrich von Hayek: “The history of government management of money has, except for a few short happy periods, been one of incessant fraud and deception.” 4 The unit of account function of money is important: only when businessmen can record their revenues and expenses in the same unit are they able to figure out whether their activities were profitable!
