# Who Is Allowed to Create Money and Who Is Not

## Source Metadata

- Chapter number: 3
- TOC index: 9
- Part: main
- EPUB src: text/part0008.html
- Extraction mode: single-source

## Extracted Text

2. Who is allowed to create money and who is not “Politicians love ‘easy money,’ because with it, the state and its power elite can go into debt as they wish, without ever having to think of repayment.” - Roland Baader Having explained what money is, we can now deal with the question of how money is produced. You may also be interested in who is allowed to create money today and who is not. And how the answers to these questions are hidden in the system. In the introduction, we noted the fact that since 1999 the M2 money supply has almost doubled in the eurozone, and almost tripled in the United States. How does the money supply increase? First we want to look at the production of natural money. “Natural money” is to be understood here as the money supply in a pure commodity money system — for example, where gold and/or silver is used, and in which the supply of money only grows when the supply of new precious metals does. After all, in a free market anyone can mine for gold and silver! Searching for and finding gold and silver deposits in the ground has always been very time- and labor-intensive, and so is getting it out of the ground. Therefore the growth rate of the available quantity of precious metals has historically been very low. It was exactly this relative scarcity that made gold and silver such excellent means of exchange. In the past, the production and processing of precious metals was always done by gold prospectors and goldsmiths. Taking into consideration that money is a physical good, and specifically the good with the highest degree of marketability, gold prospectors and goldsmiths did nothing more than produce a market good. No objection can be made to this form of money production, just as none can be made to any other form of goods production that does not violate property rights. And if, in a precious metals-based monetary system, someone was able to produce gold artificially or synthetically, and the result was a considerable expansion of the gold supply and thus of the money supply, then with all probability market participants would abandon the use of gold and move on to using a different good as money.5 In a free market, in which people voluntarily agree — without any state coercion — on their money, this would be a completely normal and beneficial process. Let us return to our imaginary small city from the previous chapter. Remember, gold is the commonly used medium of exchange in our city. An observant goldsmith noticed how people used gold pieces in trade and had the novel idea of smelting down gold and turning it into coins with standardized weights of 1 gram, 5 grams, 10 grams, and 100 grams of gold, with the goldsmith-mint guaranteeing these weights. The mint earned a minting fee for this work, since the coins of standardized weights are more useful in trade than odd-sized lumps of gold. The people in our city have now become accustomed to handling their commercial transactions with gold. They love being able to exchange their goods indirectly using gold coins, rather than directly. Commercial exchange has increased considerably, and people have become wealthier. To begin with, people keep their gold in their homes. As a consequence, some people have misplaced or even lost some of their gold, and there have been burglaries. This becomes a problem. Then one of the market participants, let us call her Anne, has a brilliant business idea, namely to offer a gold storage service. She offers people a place to store their money safely! She has a big safe or a vault installed on her property, and she gives anyone who stores their gold there a warehouse receipt that states the exact amount of gold that was stored. By storing everyone’s gold in a big common safe, she can offer secure gold storage at a low price. She charges a fee for this storage service, of course. People are willing to pay this fee since they no longer have to store their gold insecurely at home. The risk of losing the gold or being the victim of a burglary falls. The warehouse receipts are easier to hide from thieves. Of course, anyone can go to Anne and get their gold back by presenting the warehouse receipt. A simple and ingenious idea! For this to work, an absolute requirement is that Anne has to have the trust of the other market participants. Her reputation must be above reproach. No one would entrust their gold to a crook! Would you deposit your money with a bank you did not trust?6 Anne’s business model works. Many people bring their gold to her for storage and obtain their warehouse receipts in return. Whenever someone wants to make a purchase, they first have to go to Anne to retrieve part of their gold. Then after the sales transaction, the seller takes the newly acquired gold back to Anne for safe storage, and he receives his own warehouse receipt for it. After this has been going on for some time, for the sake of convenience sellers begin to accept warehouse receipts as payment, and then they exchange them for gold as needed at Anne’s business. Because Anne has always delivered gold in exchange for warehouse receipts, some people begin to skip the redemption step and just hang on to the warehouse receipts. The paper warehouse receipts begin to circulate, and people start using them as the means of payment (i.e., as money) instead of gold. This is because all of the market participants trust that they can go to Anne at any time with a warehouse receipt and receive gold in return. After a while fewer and fewer of the market participants come in to exchange their warehouse notes for gold. By far the largest portion of the gold stays in the vault! Anne now begins to think about ways to use this fact to her advantage. She considers getting into the money-lending business. Let us assume that toy merchant Steve deposits 100 grams of gold at Anne’s business. Anne now succumbs to temptation and loans out 90 grams of the gold belonging to Steve in cash to homebuilder Hector. BOOM! Did you notice what happened? An almost transcendental act! At this moment, new money has been created from nothing. Before Steve deposited his money, he had in his possession 100 grams of gold. Now Steve has a warehouse receipt for 100 grams of gold. He believes that he owns and can spend 100 grams of gold. Because in his eyes, and in the eyes of the market participants, the warehouse receipt is as good as gold — the gold is secure in Anne’s vault and can always be redeemed. He can also use the warehouse receipt for purchases. At the same time, Hector believes he has 90 grams of gold to spend. Both taken together believe, justifiably so, that they can spend 190 grams of gold, and they act accordingly. The money supply (the total quantity of money apparently available in the marketplace) has somehow increased by 90%! This money creation becomes even more evident when we imagine that Anne does not pay out the loan to Hector in physical gold from the vault, but simply issues an additional warehouse note for 90 grams of gold, for which there is no corresponding gold in the vault. The effect is the same. Anne’s new business model becomes an instant success. The market participants gladly accept her loan offers. Previously, in order for a person to get a loan for consumption or investment purposes, someone else had to be ready to forgo the use of his gold or his warehouse receipt. But now, that is no longer necessary. The warehouse receipts are created as if out of thin air. Anne needs nothing other than paper and some ink to make them. What a wonderful business model! Anne creates warehouse notes at little cost to herself and provides them as loans, some of which are paid back using physical gold, and along the way she even gets to charge interest on the loans! She just has to be careful not to issue too many loans. Why? Because if she did, market participants might become suspicious after noticing that more and more warehouse notes are in circulation. And you know what may happen then. People might lose trust in Anne and then — exactly. A bank run would follow. People would run to Anne to exchange their warehouse receipts for physical gold. It should be obvious that the last of them to arrive at the bank would go home empty-handed, because only a fraction of the warehouse receipts would represent gold physically present in Anne’s vault (her “gold reserves”). The logical consequence of Anne’s business methods is that they serve to increase the local money supply. Not only do we have in circulation the warehouse notes that were originally issued when gold was deposited, we now also have the warehouse notes that were created in the process of issuing loans and for which there is no corresponding gold in the vault. We will go into the consequences that come from this later. One thing is clear: the loans made by Anne represent a misuse of the assets deposited with her by her customers. She is making use of the property of others and thus violates their property rights. Her actions are criminal, plain and simple. You should now recognize that the business transactions that Anne is carrying out are very similar to what our banks do today. One could even say that Anne is acting as a bank. Accepting deposits and issuing loans are the essential characteristics of a bank. You may also have noticed that so far in the story there is no government or state authority in the picture. The next questions must then be why and — most importantly — how states and governments throughout history have come to make money production their own affair? The why of it is easy to answer. We mentioned it in the first chapter: politicians do not like austerity. Quite the contrary. Anyone who wants to keep the population happy, to buy votes, or to make good on campaign promises, has to have a lot of money available and spend it. But where to get it? Taxes are not exactly popular. They remind the population that state expenses and gifts to voters also cost money and do not magically fall like manna from heaven. What better way to solve the politician’s spending problem than by him becoming a partner in the very production of money? Explaining how doesn’t take much longer. For a government which is the ultimate authority in a given territory, it is relatively easy to misuse the process of money production for their own advantage. Imagine that Anne has overdone it with issuing warehouse receipts. After a boom, there will always be a bust. Several market participants can no longer pay back their loans. People begin to doubt Anne’s solvency and they start redeeming their receipts for gold. Anne’s safe begins to run out of gold. A trickle becomes a raging river. At some point, Anne runs out of gold and is forced to stop redeeming storage receipts. The customers get upset and sue her. In the process, the residing king in the distant capital city is called on to adjudicate the case. He doesn’t find Anne’s actions to be so bad after all. He thinks the customers can wait a bit. He trusts that Anne will pay back the gold after a time. The customers are very angry, but Anne stays in business. The economy slowly recovers and Anne starts receiving new gold deposits. She is considering whether to risk issuing new un-backed warehouse receipts again, when the king asks her if he might not get a loan at a favorable interest rate. After all, defending the realm through war is expensive! And does not Anne have a patriotic duty to help out? Of course, Anne cannot say no, and gives the king a loan by issuing fresh warehouse receipts. And thus the game begins anew. An unholy alliance develops between the ruler(s) and the banking system. The king does not defend the property rights of the bank customers, instead he allows Anne to create money out of thin air. In exchange for this, part of the newly created money is given to the state, in other words, to the king. To illustrate this, two short historical examples should be mentioned. A famous bank which was not a fractional reserve bank was the Bank of Amsterdam, founded in 1609. For about 170 years, all customer deposits in the bank were backed one hundred percent with precious metals. Theoretically, all the customers of the Bank of Amsterdam could have turned up at the same time and demanded their deposits back. No customer would have had to leave empty handed. A bank run would not have been problematic. The bank had a high degree of trust from its depositors. That continued until the 1780s, when the city of Amsterdam needed money to cover its expenses in the fourth Anglo-Dutch War, and requested that the bank lend the city part of its reserves, i.e., part of the customers’ deposits. The second example is the Bank of England, which was founded in the year 1694 in order to finance public expenses. The BoE followed the same path as the BoA, with similar results. This story is described in economist Jesús Huerta de Soto’s book Money, Bank Credit and Economic Cycles. There is a key difference in these examples compared to our modern banking system. Back then, even when only a fraction of deposits was held as reserves, the reserves were still in the form of physical gold. Thus, money creation out of thin air had some natural limits. A money note represented a claim to real money, in other words, to precious metal. If there was a bank run, gold or silver had to be delivered, otherwise the bank would have to close its doors. And gold cannot be printed. The danger of gold or silver reserves flowing out was thus an important brake on the creation of money out of thin air. Banks could not become too bold in their actions, because customers could demand to get their gold or silver back at any time. Today holders of bank notes cannot demand to be paid in precious metal. Recall the speech by the president of the German Bundesbank, Jens Weidmann: “Modern money is not backed by any physical asset. Bank notes are printed paper —those knowledgeableamong you know that in the case of the euro, it is made of cotton.” Just as a passing thought: just for fun, send a 5-euro note to the European central bank or a 5-dollar bill to the Fed. Include a friendly letter and ask for it to be redeemed. If you receive an answer at all, it will consist of a nice letter and a different 5-euro note or 5-dollar bill. At any rate, history has run its course and you can now understand Hayek’s statement that the history of the state’s dealings with money is a long history of lies and fraud. The origins of the symbiotic relationship between the state and the banking system, to the benefit of both, goes far back in history. So far back that most of the people living today know only a paper money system; they do not question it because they have known nothing else. Ludwig von Mises in his 1949 book Human Action wrote: “It is a fable that governments interfered with banking in order to restrict the issue of fiduciary media [bank notes] and to prevent credit expansion. The idea that guided governments was, on the contrary, the lust for inflation and credit expansion.“ Governments gave banks privileges because they wanted to remove the limits that market money puts on credit expansion, or because they were eager to make available to the treasury an additional source of revenue. Government, as the “ultimate judge,” has enacted laws to legitimize exactly those business transactions that we saw as clearly fraudulent in our story of Anne and her gold warehouse. In return, the banks stand ready to contribute to the financing of the state’s expenses, by using money created out of thin air in the form of credit. Ultimately, the introduction of paper money was an essential factor in the state becoming — step by step — the master of money. While previously it was the role of private goldsmiths to mint gold and silver coins, the state now created a monopoly for itself. Step by step, private money providers were driven from the market by legal means. In order to enable the creation of ever greater quantities of money, the link between paper notes and gold was loosened to a greater and greater degree. People were weaned from the use of gold as cash. The law was used in a targeted way to promote the use of bank notes, and redemption into gold was made harder. Gradually people became used to paper money. At the end of 1944, the Bretton Woods system was founded. At the time, a U.S. dollar could be exchanged for 1/35 of an ounce of gold by any foreign central bank. Private persons however were not allowed to exchange their paper dollars for gold. This system was called the gold exchange standard, and it lasted only until 1971, as we mentioned in the first chapter. And why couldn’t this system be maintained either? Because yet again politicians wanted to spend more money than they had available. Even the weak and indirect link to gold inherent in the Bretton Woods system limited the politicians too much in their orgies of spending. So it had to go. Since 1971 we have been living under a pure paper money system, in which the money supply can in theory be increased without limit. If there is a bank run, limited gold reserves is not a problem anymore. All the authorities have to do is to print the necessary quantity of new paper money. Wouldn’t it be fun if we could all play that game, and print as much money as we needed? Yes of course, but we cannot, because the state and the banks like to keep things to themselves, and we are not invited to their party. The central bank also likes to be thought of as the lender of last resort, the ultimate provider of credit, and as a rescuer. A rescuer who jumps in to help during an emergency, when the banks are in trouble, such as when too many customers attempt to withdraw their money at the same time. In the case of the U.S. central bank (the Federal Reserve System), which was founded in 1913, this lender of last resort was created at the request of the banks. After all, the bankers are not dumb. They know that without a central bank, in the case of a bank run the jig is up. Thus, it is in their interest that there be a central bank. And it is good to know that a central bank can make unlimited liquidity (i.e., money) available when problems arise. Backstopped in this way, the banks can create additional money as aggressively as they like. By contrast, in a competitive monetary order in which the state does not have its hands in the game, a central bank would be totally unnecessary. You now know how and why governments all over the world have taken on and copied this ingenious business model of creating new money out of thin air. By law, they have created for themselves a monetary monopoly together with the entire banking system, including the advantages of monetary creation and money printing. What do you think of this monopoly? Can you print money and buy assets with the money you printed? No? But the central bank does that. Are you allowed to create money on a computer and credit the accounts of others, and earn interest on it in the process? No, but the banks can. Why are they allowed to do that, but we are not? Do you think this is fair? Can a just society be based on such a system? What is cause for concern here is that this state of affairs seems not to bother anyone. People have shown themselves more concerned by the need to build a bridge for frogs to cross a highway than by the need for a private banking system. At least, they have been up until now, as shown in the 37 bridges built for animals in Germany. Now, we would like to look at how money arises in the banking system in more detail. At your leisure, do the following test: ask a friend or acquaintance if he or she knows where the permanently expanding money supply comes from. The answer that you will receive will — almost certainly — be: “The central bank prints the money” or “the Fed prints the money.” The answer is even partly correct. It is true that the central banks print money. But not only in paper form, as the pictures from the German Weimar hyperinflation in 1923 show, where people pushed wheelbarrows full of money around. Today, central banks create money electronically in the form of bits and bytes. That is cheaper. They don’t even need paper and ink, as Anne from our imaginary city did. The central banks inject this electronic money into the banking system to support the creation of credit and to “improve liquidity,” as it is expressed in official press releases. Central banks are akin to modern day gold prospectors producing at virtually zero costs. The creation of new money by central banks is often referred to as “monetary policy,” which officially aims at maintaining “price stability.” However, the main effects for central bank money creation are two. First, central banks save and support the banking system, which indirectly finances the political class and their favorite policy schemes. Second, central banks create money to finance the government even more directly. This happens when a central bank buys government bonds, i.e., government debt. The central bank may buy the bonds from the government or from the banking system. In both cases the government receives a bank wire transfer directly to its accounts. In exchange for the newly created money, the central bank receives government bonds. The new money for this transaction comes directly from the government’s printing press, or more precisely from the central bank’s computer. In the jargon of economists this process is called “the monetization of debt.” That may sound terribly noble, but it isn’t better because of the name. Governments have their central banks create money, then have the money wired to themselves, and then they buy all kinds of stuff with it: iPads for their employees, plush new offices, a fleet of luxury vehicles, or they rescue some other country’s government from bankruptcy using the argument that there was no alternative. Most people believe that new money is only created by the central banks. But that is incorrect. The biggest part of money growth takes place in the banking system itself, including your savings and loan and the credit union around the corner. There is another test you may try on anyone that you know. Most likely, a conversation like the following will result: “What does your local bank do with the money that is in your checking account?” “They work with it.” “Yes, but what does the bank do with it, exactly?” “They invest it.” “Ok, but how does the bank invest it?” “I don’t know.” “Why do you think that the money is still in your account, when the bank is using it for its own purposes?” “I don’t know that either.” “You have the money in your checking account. Why in checking rather than a savings account?” “Because I may need it on short notice.” “Is it ok if your bank invests your money, whatever they are doing with it, when you may need it on short notice?” “Not really, but I don’t care, so long as I can get to it at any time.” Given such a lack of understanding, it is high time to clear the air. We live with a fractional reserve banking system. This means that your bank is allowed — by the highest authorities, in other words with legal permission from the government banking authorities — to loan out your money. It merely has to maintain a minimum required reserve ratio, and in the U.S. that is — you might want to sit down — about 10%. Again: 10%. Let’s assume that you have $10,000 in your checking account. Your bank may, theoretically, loan out $9,000 of that. Your bank only has to hold $1,000 as a reserve in cash, or they may park the equivalent amount in an account at the central bank. Your bank is thus acting exactly as Anne did in our imaginary city, when she loaned out 90 grams of gold out of every 100 grams deposited. You may now object and say, “I don’t care, so long as I can withdraw it at any time.” Let’s just allow that to stand without comment for now. When you are done reading this book, hopefully you will know more, and care. Let’s assume that your bank lends $7,000 of the $10,000 in your account to your neighbor. She signs a loan contract at the bank, and the next day she takes a look at her bank statement to see if the loan has been credited to her account. You see her by chance in the lobby of the bank. She has her statement in her hand, the loan went through and her account now shows a balance of $7,000. Your own statement shows that you still have $10,000. If the money were no longer there in full, you would immediately protest, right? Let us do some quick arithmetic: $7,000 plus $10,000 makes $17,000. But before your neighbor got her loan from the bank, there was only your $10,000 on hand at the bank!?!? You will no doubt agree that we are now entitled to ask where those extra $7,000 came from, since they did not exist yesterday. The answer is as short as it is incredible: Out of nowhere! You have just witnessed how new money is created. You now know how our money is created, and you can understand why our paper money is called fiat money. If you know a little Latin you have no doubt already translated that phrase in your head. Almost everyone knows the phrase from The Bible, as God created the Universe: He said, “Fiat Lux,” which is translated as: “Let there be light.” In other words, Fiat Money = Let-there-be money: what is money is money by someone’s decree, not because it was freely chosen by market participants. At this point, you may not be able to see what important negative effects this money creation process has on the purchasing power of your income and your wealth, and even on your private life, and because you are not alone, on the entire society. But this book will tell you. We promise. Do you think that the game is over at this point? Not a chance. Let’s go back to your neighbor’s bank statement, which showed a balance of $7,000 after she received her loan. Let us assume that she will be making purchases with this money. Taking out a loan just to let the money sit in her account would not have made much sense. She decides to remodel her kitchen, and she transfers the money for that purchase to the seller. The money is deposited to the account of the kitchen renovation firm. At the same bank or at a different bank, that doesn’t make any difference here. At any rate, the money creation process continues apace. Let us assume that out of the $7,000 deposited by the kitchen renovator the bank lends $5,000 to a guy who wants to purchase a car. His checking account is credited with $5,000. Let’s do the math: you still have $10,000 in your account, the kitchen renovator has $7,000, and the prospective car buyer has $5,000 in his account. If the car purchase is made and if the seller of the car deposits $5,000 at her bank, the game can go on to the next round. Let us assume that the car seller’s bank provides a $3,000 consumer loan to a customer who wants to buy a new flat-screen TV. After the sale, the seller of the TV deposits the amount into his checking account. Now, the checking accounts hold a total of $10,000 plus $7,000 plus $5,000 plus $3,000. The original $10,000 deposit has now grown to $25,000! And we could continue on from there. But that won’t be necessary. We do not want to waste your time, or ours. You can see that as the process goes on, the total amount of money grows, while the amounts of newly created money become smaller and smaller. In our example, we have assumed a relatively large reserve ratio. Out of the $10,000 in the initial step, only $7,000 were loaned out. Implicitly, this represents a reserve ratio of 30%. Let us instead use the Fed´s required reserve ratio of 10%. From the initial $10,000, not $7,000 but up to $9,000 are lent, then at the next step $8,100, then $7,290, and so on. (Each step is 90% of the previous step.) Mathematically, this is an infinite series which has a convergent sum. In the extreme case, an initial $10,000 could grow to become $100,000. The banking system would then have created $90,000 out of thin air. It maintains a cash reserve of $10,000 (namely, your initial $10,000 deposit), in other words, 10% of total deposits. By comparison, the required reserve ratio in the eurozone is only one %! At this point in the explanation, a common objection raised is that through the purchases or investments made with the borrowed money, new goods are produced, or put more simply, “the economy grows.” That may be, but we will prove to you in this book that sustainable, real wealth cannot be created from nothing. It is also hard to imagine that it could be. It would be too good to be true! Let us take this “We are making money out of thin air and creating wealth with it” model to its logical conclusion: We simply create billions and billions of dollars of new bank notes and distribute them to everyone. Soon everyone would have so much money that they would not need to work anymore! But we both know that in the real world this quite simply cannot work: who would then be producing the food and other goods we need? Our coercive state monopoly monetary system is the biggest case of fraud in human history. Let us be more precise: it is fraud against the people. And if — as mentioned in the introduction — your bank account has not tripled in the last 15 years, then you are one of those cheated. You are cheated by having your income and your purchasing power stolen and your personal property violated. And this takes place in a hidden manner through an obscure process so complex that almost no one understands it. Henry Ford (1863–1947), the founder of the Ford Motor Company, put it this way: It is well enough that people of the nation do not understand our banking and monetary system, for if they did, I believe there would be a revolution before tomorrow morning. Summary: Our money is no longer linked to or backed by any physical commodity. Modern fiat money is created from nothing, out of thin air. It is created partly by the central bank (when it purchases government bonds or other assets) and partly by the banking system itself (through the fractional reserve multiplier process we described above). The monetary system is regulated by the government, and in fact the state has the legal monopoly on the creation of new money. The state and the banks that help finance it are in a position to benefit greatly from this monopoly. 5 They would continue to use gold for other purposes of course, such as in dentistry, in electronics, and in jewelry, though without the monetary demand, the relative price of gold would fall. Only fiat paper money becomes totally worthless when no longer useful as money. 6 Actually, today most people entrust their money to a bank without even asking themselves whether the bank is safe. The system encourages us to act in this way with such devices as the “Member FDIC” sticker on the door.
