# Why Our Current Money Creates Social Injustice

## Source Metadata

- Chapter number: 4
- TOC index: 10
- Part: main
- EPUB src: text/part0009.html
- Extraction mode: single-source

## Extracted Text

3. Why our current money creates social injustice “Few people really understand to what extent — over generations — the combination of the progressive income tax and inflation has robbed them of the fruits of their labor.” - Roland Baader Rarely have definitions created such confusion as in the case of the terms “inflation” and “deflation.” Inflation comes from Latin and means “to blow up” (as in inflating a balloon). And deflation comes from “deflare” and means “to drain” (as in deflating the balloon). Ask some friends what they understand inflation to mean. Inflation is when everything becomes more expensive. This or something similar will almost certainly be their answer. Now, definitions are not true or false in and of themselves. We use them as tools of thought. But a definition can be inappropriate when applied to a given subject, and can even cause confusion. Until about the middle of the 20th century, inflation was understood as an expansion of the money supply. The opposite also applied. Deflationmeant a decrease in the money supply, not a period of falling prices. Only with the ascent of economist John Maynard Keynes (1883–1946) did the modern equating of inflation with more expensive goods arise. Enter “inflation” in Google as a search term and you will be surprised. In most of the search results, the concept is interpreted as increasing prices. Even in a pamphlet put out by the European Central Bank for a younger audience — under the title Price stability: why is it important for you? — it states, “Inflation is understood as a general or broad rise in prices for goods and services over a longer period of time, which leads to a decline in the value of money and to a loss of purchasing power.” The definition of deflation is along the same lines — well, at least they are consistent. The following statement can be found in the same brochure: “Deflation exists when the general price level falls over a longer period of time.” When so many people and even the experts (and the people from the ECB are surely experts) have forgotten the traditional definition of inflation as an expansion of the money supply, or when they choose to ignore it, then it is fair to ask ourselves whether we are being intentionally misled. One is inclined to assume that they don’t want everyone to understand that the money supply is being continually expanded. No one questions why everything becomes more expensive. Because after all, people have become so used to it. Virtually no one asks what the actual reasons for the price increases are. “That’s just the way it is. Everything gets more expensive. Do you know what a scoop of ice cream used to cost? 10 cents.” Defining inflation as an increase in the prices of goods and services deflects attention away from the real reasons. It is much easier to blame others. Then it becomes the evil capitalist ice cream vendor or the greedy oil baron who have raised prices to enrich themselves. Defining inflation as an increase in prices is like confusing a symptom with the underlying illness. But it is not the fever that is the cause of the illness, it is the viruses in the body. In just the same way, the rising prices is merely the result of monetary expansion. It is not even a necessary consequence. It would be easy to come to the wrong conclusion that if there are no price increases, everything must be ok. This would be very wrong. Even if the prices do not rise there can still be an increase in the money supply, compensated for by other factors such as a rise in productivity due to innovation, and/or an expansion of the division of labor. Today’s common understanding of inflation diverts attention away from the expansion of the money supply. Even if prices do not rise or rise only slightly, increases in the money supply have their typical results, which we will discuss later in this book. Why people got away from the original inflation definition, understood as increases in the money supply, may now be clear. Someone might ask, “Well, where does all this money actually come from?” It looks like they don’t want us to look too closely. Not everyone needs to know that money is created out of thin air, goes the thinking. At the end, the citizen might want to know why they need to work for their money while others create it with a snap of their fingers. So just for the record, again: We define inflation as an expansion of the money supply; the concept of deflation means a reduction of the money supply. Rising prices are a result of inflation, as measured, for example, by the monthly consumer price indexes published by the government (the Bureau of Labor Statistics in the U.S., bls.gov). More later on the consumer price index. In Europe, the experts at the European Central Bank have even come up with a goal for the growth of the money supply: 4.5% per year. This is a “reference value,” the rate that they would like to see the money supply grow by every year in the eurozone. But more money does not make a society richer. If our central bankers believed that it did, then why don’t they stop being so modest and let the money supply grow by 10% per year, or 20%, or why not even 100% per year? Suggest to the Fed that they should call in all the dollar notes, coins, and bank accounts and replace the numbers on them by adding a zero to the end. The money supply would be ten times bigger. Those calling for more money and an expansive Fed policy would be overjoyed. Maybe they would even win the Nobel Prize in economics for their idea. A prize of 8,000,000 Swedish kronor, which is about $940,000 (or even $9,400,000 after our monetary expansion!). Imagine that. It would be worth a try, right? But seriously. Would society really become richer as a result of such a monetary expansion? Would there be more cars, more real estate, groceries, and arts, movies and theater offerings? No. The only thing that would happen by putting this idea into practice is that the prices would become ten times higher. The opposite also applies. If they took a zero off all bank notes and coins, society would not be poorer. Real goods would not have disappeared. Only the money supply would have contracted to one-tenth its former size. The purchasing power of the remaining dollars would have expanded by a power of ten. This shows that any quantity of money is optimal for purposes of fulfilling the exchange function of money. If a zero is added to the end of the numbers printed on bank notes, the price level will go up by a factor of ten. If a zero is removed, they go down to one-tenth. But the dollar would not be a better or a worse money. This should put to rest the persistent falsehood that the money supply needs to “adapt to the supply of goods” or that the economy needs a “rising money supply to grow.” In reality, some economists are still attached to these falsehoods and proclaim them as an argument for a paper currency. They fear that economic growth without (sufficient) monetary growth could bring production to a standstill. Wrong. If more is produced, prices will fall without an expansion of the monetary supply. For companies, that is not a problem; they would produce and sell more too. Falling prices are the natural result of economic growth. This is the natural way for most people to take part in advances in productivity. That would only be fair, don’t you think? But those in power always try to prevent falling prices. Why? Price deflation phobia reigns supreme. What is overlooked is the fact that falling prices do not have to be a problem for enterprises. What is decisive for enterprises is their margin, in other words the difference between their input prices and their output prices. If the input prices fall faster than the output prices, the margins will even increase, as is the case today in the technology sector. It is indeed true that people in debt lose out when prices fall unexpectedly, and can be forced into bankruptcy if they happen to be over-indebted. But from the perspective of the overall economy, that is not so problematic. Redistribution simply occurs. Creditors who have better foreseen the price development take over that bankrupt enterprise and become its new owners. But this change of ownership does not affect the productive capacity of the economy as a whole, because the factories, streets, machines, and workers still exist. What a clever strategy: To claim that falling prices would be a catastrophe and to propose as the solution … well, you can predict what that will be. Right: an expansion of the money supply. And the new money should come to those proposing this, thank you very much. Then the economy will supposedly also prosper. This phobia against falling prices is meant to legitimize inflation. And with inflation debtors profit at the cost of savers and creditors. Those who obtain the new money first are the winners. And this brings us to the effects of inflation. What does inflation mean for you, for your income, for your wealth? What effects does inflation have on income and wealth distribution within a society? You will now understand why we called this book Blind Robbery! How the Fed, Banks and Government Steal Our Money. Because you are familiar with our imaginary small city by now — you already know some of the city’s inhabitants — we will now return to it. Gold as a commodity money has proven itself as an excellent means of exchange in our imaginary city. We will assume that our storage entrepreneur Anne works in a manner that is above reproach, in other words she no longer issues excess warehouse receipts against the money in her vault. And after massive citizen protests, the king no longer interferes with the monetary system. The gold prospectors look for gold every day, but new finds are very rare and small. Gold in the ground, which makes prospecting and digging profitable, appears to have dried up. Thus the gold supply only increases at a very low annual rate. The people in the city are hardworking and because the quantity of goods produced is always increasing, while the quantity of gold remains almost the same, the purchasing power of gold continually rises. The prices of goods fall. Almost everyone is happy, except the gold prospectors. Some of them have gotten together and worked on a new kind of drill which they will use to look for gold in ever deeper rock layers. One day, one of the prospectors comes up with the idea of putting a special steel tip on the drill that will not wear out, even when drilling through hard rock. Initial tests are carried out and it works. The group of prospectors can now drill much deeper, and the first attempt meets with success. They hit many gold formations at depths that they were not able to reach before. They now know that their mining efforts will be profitable and they are able to find large quantities of gold, quantities that exceed previous production quantities, and that are greater than the quantities achieved by their colleagues working with traditional drills. Our gold prospectors get a goldsmith to turn the gold they found into coins, and now they have amounts of money that they would not have dreamed of a short time before. They use their money to invest extensively to expand their production even further. They purchase large areas of land under which they suspect there may be large gold deposits. They purchase additional machines such as rock-grinders and trucks, they build new warehouses, expand their production facilities, and hire new miners. And because our gold prospectors are forward-looking entrepreneurs, they begin to invest in other sectors by buying shares in other companies. As a result, share prices start to rise. What the gold prospectors do not know at the moment is that with their gold finds they have put themselves into a really comfortable position. In the beginning, they are able to make all of their purchases and investments at yesterday’s prices, because the new money flows into the market for the first time. If a prospector finds new gold, he is the first recipient and the winner in the monetary increase game. This is because the gold prospector can make purchases with his new money at the old, still unchanged prices. If he and his friends buy more beer in their favorite bar located right next to the mine, then the beer prices will have a tendency to rise. The next person to benefit is the bar owner who profits from the money supply increase — if somewhat less than our fortunate gold prospector. Due to increased income, the bar owner now has more money. And he can spend the money himself to buy roses for his wife, for example. The price of roses increases. The new money makes its way to the florist, who spends it. The money slowly is distributed throughout the economy. Prices rise. Just as the prospector, the bar owner, and the florist benefit from the monetary expansion, there are others who lose, because the money only gets to them later. They have to pay higher prices for beer, flowers, and other goods, before their income rises. To make the redistribution specific: the beer that the later recipient of the money used to be able to buy and which he cannot afford to buy now, is instead enjoyed by the gold prospector. In 1949, Ludwig von Mises described the effects of the changed money quantities in his book Human Action: “Every change in the money relation alters — apart from its effects upon deferred payments — the conditions of the individual members of society. Some become richer, some poorer ... If an inflationary movement and a deflationary one occur at the same time or if an inflation is temporally followed by a deflation in such a way that in the end prices are not very much changed, the social consequences of each of the two movementsdo not cancel each other. To the social consequences of an inflation are added those of a deflation.” What lessons can be learned from what happened in our city? The answer is simple: income and wealth were redistributed. The gold prospectors became richer. Those who were second or third in line to receive the new money also gained, but less. All those who obtained the new money later became relatively poorer. The true losers from the increase in the quantity of money are those whose income grew slower than the prices. Those who were harmed the most were those who were the last to enjoy the new money, or who obtained none of it. By the way, what happens when the new gold fields run dry? Or when the new money is not produced in as high a volume as before? Then the economic structures created by the expansion of the money supply will be unable to withstand the test of time. The bar owner now has fewer sales, and so does the person selling roses. If the bar owner expanded his bar during the boom time, he will now have financial problems, because there will be fewer miners buying his beer. The new mines now become ruins — the ghost towns of the American West are an example. After the gold was exhausted there, the structures that were built up with a lot of time and effort were written off as malinvestments and abandoned. The same occurs in the modern paper money system, which leads to investments that are not in tune with long-term consumer demand. These projects and investments will also be written off at some point as malinvestments, just like the “ghost towns” on the periphery of big Spanish cities that were built during the recent real estate bubble. If paper money production is slowed down, it will become evident that many enterprises were only created as a response to monetary production, and thus took funds away from other projects. But more on business cycle theory in the next chapter. Back to inflation. When the money supply is expanded — or inflated — it is of critical importance who gets to use the new money first. The first recipients of the new money have clear advantages over the later recipients and of course over the last recipients. Those who obtain the new money first can make purchases at prices that have not started going up yet. As Murray N. Rothbard explains in his book What Has Government Done to Our Money?, the money then expands step by step through the economy and causes the prices of goods to rise. Those who get the money last are the losers in this game. They can only buy at increased prices and receive less and less for their money. If you are a wage earner, a salaried employee, or a retiree, then you should probably view yourself as one of the losers. By the time the newly created money gets to you, the first recipients have already invested it. They have bought real estate and invested in corporate stock. By the time it is your turn, the real estate that you would have liked to buy is now too expensive. The money that you saved for years is no longer enough. If we wanted to be cynical, we could have said, real estate has gotten too rich for your money. But the effects of bad money are much too serious to be cynical about. And if you now decide to invest in the stock market instead, the stock market will be at a level where the first recipients have already gotten out — having realized big profits. But who are these first recipients to whom the new money flows first? Primarily, it is the government, the banks, and large companies and corporations. They are the ones who get their hands on the newly created credit money before you do. But they are also borrowers who are ready to take on debt in order to procure goods or for investment purposes. The new money thus flows to them before it does to you. We do not at all want to blame those who are merely taking on debt and who have no responsibility for the way that our monetary system is designed. They are merely acting rationally. They strive to earn profits and to improve their wealth. The task of entrepreneurs and managers is to make products and services available that customers want to buy. And to be able to do that, investments in development, production, and sales are necessary. Often, they do not have the necessary capital to fund their projects, and that makes taking on debt necessary. Nevertheless, bad money also has negative effects for enterprises. We will discuss this in a later chapter. A small aside: The effect triggered by the increase in the money supply resulting in a redistribution of wealth is called the Cantillon Effect, named after the Irish banker Richard Cantillon (1680–1734), who witnessed the results of a massive monetary expansion on a “live subject.” It was during the time when the French massively expanded their money supply based on a suggestion by Scottish financier John Law (1671–1729). This expansion led to a financial bubble related to the French Mississippi Company, and it burst — as all paper money bubbles do — and many investors were ruined by it. As a result, the term “bank” was for a long time synonymous with “fraud” in France. The people of France suffered for decades from the devastating effects of Law’s paper money experiment. It was an exciting time in which Cantillon and Law lived. Today is also exciting — and rest assured, it will remain exciting and will get even more exciting. It is possible that the term “bank” in the not too distant future will also trigger negative associations like that. But back to the topic at hand: Because new money does not reach the market participants at the same time (and fails to reach some at all), income and wealth are redistributed massively within a society, and the tendency is for that to be fromthose at the bottom to those at the top: from wage earners, salaried employees, and fixed-income retirees and to the government, the banks, (large) companies, large-scale investors and to those already rich. That is because whoever already has assets can use those as security for additional loans, in order to obtain more real estate and shares of companies while credit is cheap. For sure, rich people are more easily able to gain access to the new money created out of thin air. The result is clear. According to the fourth German poverty and wealth report of the German government of 2013, the lower 50% of households have only about 1% of total net assets, while the 10% of richest households have 53% of total assets. Expressed another way, the 10% richest households have more net assets than the other 90% combined. And the chasm is growing. Since 1998, the share of the 10% richest households — relative to total assets in the economy — has grown by 8%. Inflation results in an unjust distribution of wealth in an economy. You certainly will have noticed that we have avoided the fuzzy term “social justice” here. While everyone has a clear idea of what just actions are, specifically to not kill, cheat, or steal, the term “social justice” is vague. It can mean almost anything. And the term is often used to justify something that is deeply unjust, for example the expropriation of legally gained property by means of taxes. So whenever you hear the term “social justice,” make a quick check to be sure that your wallet is still there. By installing and establishing a state monetary monopoly, it is ultimately the state that forces a redistribution that favors the super-rich. But those also profit who receive the new money from the state as second- and third-level recipients, before the prices really start to climb. For example, bankers who are bailed out, and their managers, foundations that receive money, as well as subsidized solar power companies — indirectly, a whole army of state dependents. It is mainly the productive, hard-working citizens who save who come out empty-handed. The average uninformed citizen who is forever manipulated by left-wing propaganda is of course told that it is evil capitalism that harms society and that capitalism therefore must be reined in. So: the workings of state money and the state-privileged banking system result in the super-rich becoming even richer and the lower class and middle class being forced into relative poverty. And, irony of ironies, the state then reappears, throwing around the term “social justice,” forces itself on people as an un-asked-for rescuer, and engages in a further bit of redistribution. That is like making the arsonist responsible for tossing a cup of water on the fire he started. We will discuss how the state exploits the lack of knowledge of the average person later in this book. Coerced redistribution is not only deeply unjust, it also creates social conflicts. Everywhere there is social conflict today, we find an underlying redistribution battle as the cause. Either the losers of the redistribution want less redistribution, or the winners want more. But the most common case is that the redistribution is reduced and the subsidy “junkies” mobilize and protest in the streets. This happens whether it is the reduction of agricultural subsidies, a reduction in welfare payments, the introduction of tuition at public state universities, or a reduction in pay for bureaucrats in countries such as Greece. It is always about redistribution and it always results in social conflicts. The same thing does not happen in the free market. Have you ever seen a mass demonstration in a big city because Apple changed its prices, introduced a new product, or when its employees did not receive a pay raise? Anyone who dislikes Apple’s strategy can just go to work for the competition. In a free market, all decisions are voluntary. Only when redistribution and coercion come into play does harmony end. The redistribution that takes place through the monetary system also promotes conflicts, particularly when the redistribution is obvious, as seen in the recent eurozone bailouts, in which the Germans were the main losers. In the United States, ordinary people are the losers from the Fed’s “quantitative easing.” And the southern Europeans, who have become dependent on subsidies, march in protest against any cuts to their welfare states as they blame the Germans, because the Germans do not want to crank the money faucet of the ECB wide open. In short: redistribution through the euro system provokes conflicts among nations and endangers the peace in Europe. We now want to consider what effects the enormous gold findings by our gold prospectors have in our small city, when the following scenario occurs. Some citizens of the city are real geniuses. They have made critical technological advances in many areas. The best advances were in product manufacturing and logistics. Through the pioneering invention of the wheel, transport companies in particular now have many useful applications. The division of labor can be extended more cheaply. A majority of enterprises immediately use the newly developed technology, and the productivity in the city is enormously boosted. The profits of the companies rise, because with less effort, considerably more goods and services can be offered and sold than before. Now you might think that many workers and employees will no longer be needed and will be unemployed, because when companies boost their productivity through new technologies, they end up needing fewer workers. That is true. But does that mean that no new technologies should be introduced? Please! That would be nonsense. Consider the enormous technological advances that mankind has made throughout history: the wheel, the steam engine, plastics, computers, the nuclear power plant, the self-driving car … If every technological advance had created new, long-term unemployment, then by now we would have legions of unemployed, right? Correct. The invention of the wheel meant no more need for load-haulers. But all the wheels and coaches now needed do not fall from heaven, someone has to build them. Thank God that those former load-haulers are still around. Generally, the desires of people are unlimited. Many of these desires go unfulfilled, because there are not enough workers, or because not enough can be produced. Due to the invention of the wheel and the re-employment of the load-haulers, now many of those unfulfilled wishes can be fulfilled. The productivity of the economy grows thanks to new technology and capital accumulation. Through the improved productivity and the resulting increase in the production of goods (please note that the money supply remains unchanged), prices in the city begin to fall. People can now afford things that they could not afford before. The people who used to work as load-haulers begin to create a myriad of service firms that do the work that people did themselves prior to this, and which others can now do for them. Or they find new work in newly created sectors where products are manufactured which were not produced before in large quantities, because people quite simply could not afford them. Now the people of the city can afford considerably more, because the prices have fallen. Falling prices! What a concept! But wait. Before the prices start to fall, our gold prospectors come into play. Yes, the people who found a lot of gold. How nice it could have been without those guys! (Transferred to our monetary system of today, “those guys” are the central bank — the Fed or the ECB.) Just as described, their new money flows into our small city and prevents the attained productivity increases from unleashing their price-lowering effect. The dream of falling prices and being able to afford more than ever is now over. And the gold prospectors again obtain their advantage from the fact that they had the newly created money first. And the unfortunate losers are those who receive the new money last. Only this time, it is less obvious who is who, since the prices do not rise. But redistribution is still happening. Now back to present reality. It is certain that in the past 30 years, due to technological advances such as those in the IT sector, and due to China and India now taking part in the international division of labor, prices should have fallen by maybe 30 to 40%. But prices have increased. Can you (and better yet, do you dare to) imagine the enormous increase in money supply and the enormous redistribution of wealth that is responsible for this? The Fed is even so bold as to claim that prices have been kept virtually stable for a long time. So for some years, extremely low rates of price inflation have been reported. (For the ECB, “price stability” is defined as annual price increases of up to 2%! Truly an abuse of language.) But prices would have fallen without the immense money production by the Fed and other central banks. The rate by which the prices unfortunately did not fall because of monetary expansion would have to be added to the reported rate of price inflation. The rate of price inflation that would then have to be shown would certainly be considerably higher than what we have today. A loss of confidence in our paper money system would happen so much faster if that were the case. And the fiat money profiteers of course want to prevent that. A parasite can live from the host so much better, in that way. Sounds pretty harsh, right? But it is that way … unfortunately. You can translate both scenarios from our small city — with a few exceptions — to our current paper money system. The main difference is clear. It has to do with how the new money entered our city, specifically through gold finds, and how new money enters the economy today — specifically, it is created out of thin air. If people in a commodity money system — such as a currency based solely on gold — fear that immense quantities of new gold are likely to be produced, they would very quickly turn to another commodity, perhaps silver, or platinum. We don’t want to speculate, the market participants would simply, as time went on, spontaneously start using a different means of exchange. And they would be doing so in the complete absence of any coercion by the state. In our current state-run money monopoly, on the other hand, people cannot escape the situation. One flood of money after the next — created by the Fed and the banking system — washes over the people. They witness in desperation as their income and wealth continually lose value. An additional important difference between a gold-based currency and paper money is in the probability and the extent of inflation. In a pure gold currency large increases in the money supply are rare. Even when the 16th century Spanish Conquistadores brought stolen gold treasure back from the Americas to the Old World, it took an entire century before the quantity of money in Europe had doubled. (This translates into an annual growth rate of about 0.7%.) Since then, the quantity of gold has grown by between 1 and 2% per year. This is very different from the current paper money system. For example, in 2007, the U.S. M2 money supply grew by almost 12%. Growth at that rate means a doubling of the money supply every six years! An additional difference between gold in our example city and our current paper money is that everyone has the right in our city to acquire land and to prospect for gold on it. But today, not just anyone can acquire a money press and print euros or dollars. A monopoly exists. And the monopolist does not have costs. While the gold prospectors have to test and experiment with new techniques to invent something like a new drill, and take on very high costs and risks, our current money supply can be multiplied by a factor of ten at the press of a button. The temptation to use the money production privilege is almost irresistible and explains the high rate of monetary growth. Try it on your computer. Open an Excel document and name it “My account.” Type in a 1 and a lot of zeros before the dollar symbol. Not hard at all, is it? The Fed can do exactly that, and does so in order to buy up government bonds or to give credit to banks at low interest rates. Or the ECB puts up a new office complex in Frankfurt for over a billion euros in total construction costs. The effect of new, additional money is always the same. Not only when the money supply is expanded and causes price increases, but also when the money supply is expanded during a time in which the prices for goods and services otherwise would fall. In both cases, income and assets in a society are redistributed. And the tendency is for that to happen from the bottom to the top. And it cannot be reversed. It is, so to say, sustained and long term. Between 2000 and 2012 the M2 money supply in the U.S. increased by about 100%, while real output in that same period only increased by about 24%. 100%. Can you imagine the extent of the redistribution behind that figure? It is surely massive. The widely held (but erroneous) opinion of economists is that the money supply must be flexible and must grow at a rate that tracks the rate of economic growth. The above growth rate of the money supply, which far exceeded that of real economic output during the same period, thus ought to have triggered storms of protest from the economics profession. Have you seen anyone protesting it so far? We are convinced that you will now agree with us when we make the following statement: monetary expansion (inflation) is partly responsible for the increasing schism in society between rich and poor. It is responsible for the fact that more and more people cannot live on the wages they earn and that families can no longer pay for their living expenses from the income of a single wage earner. But you will never read a statement like that from a central banker or from a bank manager, and you also won’t ever hear it from a politician. From the point of view of the state and the money producers, it is definitely not desired that people understand what influence the money created out of thin air has on their lives. Have you ever witnessed a con man explaining to his victim during the con job the tricks that he is using? Summary: Inflation leads to a redistribution of income and wealth in a society. Inflation favors those who are the first to obtain the newly created money. They profit and are able to acquire goods at yet unchanged prices. Those who obtain the new money only later are the victims. At the point when they receive more income, the prices for goods and services will have already risen. The initial recipients are the state and its clientele of banks and politically connected big companies. The last recipients are wage earners, people on salary, and retirees on fixed incomes. Inflation creates poverty and makes the super-rich, who have a direct connection to the banking system, even richer. The few profit at the expense of the many.
