# Why Government Money Ruins Us Economically

## Source Metadata

- Chapter number: 5
- TOC index: 11
- Part: main
- EPUB src: text/part0010.html
- Extraction mode: single-source

## Extracted Text

4. Why government money ruins us economically “What is viewed as bad in an economic downturn are the effects coming into play of the consequences of an artificial boom fueled by credit expansion.” - Ludwig von Mises You now know how money comes into being — in a good as well as in a bad monetary system — and who profits at the expense of whom. We now want to turn to the question of what structural effects inflation (i.e., an expansion of the money supply) has on an economy. In our discussion we will primarily concentrate on business loans. Let us forget for a moment as we delve into this that there are banks. Let’s go back to our small city. Local fisherman Frank catches ten pounds of fish every day from the large lake near the city. But our fisherman is ambitious. He has noticed that fishing from shore he can only catch a limited number of fish. In the middle of the lake, the fish must be bigger and more plentiful, he reasons. So why not use a fishing boat and attach a large net to it? Instead of ten pounds of fish per day, he might be able to catch 100 pounds per day. The only problem is that he has neither a boat nor a net. Frank must first look for suitable trees and cut them down, then build the boat and finally he needs to make a fishing net. Frank calculates that he needs six months to make the boat and the fishing net.7 But what will he eat during that time? If he works full-time on the boat and the net, he cannot at the same time catch his ten pounds of fish every day. Who will feed him, his wife, and his children during those six months? Who will clothe them and buy toys for them while Frank is working to produce his capital goods? Obviously, Frank needs to save up resources before he starts his project. He will need to put aside a part of the ten pounds that he catches every day. He and his family cannot consume the entire ten pounds of fish, or exchange it all for other goods. He will need to save some of it. He must reduce his consumption to something less than the possible maximum and, for example, save five pounds of fish daily for six months. Or — if money has arisen in our small city by the lake — he must put away part of the revenue he earns from selling his daily catch. He must keep saving until he has sufficient reserves to sustain himself and his family during the time it takes for him to build the boat and make the net. He must forgo consumption and put away real savings, represented by either a room full of cured fish, or (in a monetary economy) a bag full of gold coins. After six months of saving, Frank has sufficient savings to start building his boat. If Frank completes his boat and net in the estimated half a year, he can — if his expectations are right — increase his fish production by a factor of ten. Not just he and his family, but the entire town will now be better off. This is because the production of real consumable goods — fish — has risen dramatically. In fact, the process we just described is the most important form of economic growth. Through an increase in real savings, the production of capital goods is made possible, which in turn allows for greater production of goods and/or the production of higher quality goods. The essential requirement is that sufficient real savings have been set aside first. What happens if our fisherman saves for six months, but is unable to complete his boat and net in the following six months due to circumstances beyond his control? Then Frank must stop his project prematurely, because he needs to feed his family. It might turn out that all his work was for nothing. But Frank does not necessarily have to be the one who saves! Others can do this for him. But someone has to do it, because Frank’s family cannot live on nothing but thin air. Frank can look for an investor who is willing to give him the required credit, whether that is in the form of money or real goods. He can ask friends and acquaintances for a loan. If that does not work, or he does not want to do that, he can look to others for credit by placing an ad in the local newspaper. What is the basic prerequisite for finding a willing investor? Frank’s entrepreneurial plan must be realistic and have a good chance of success; that much is clear. Two prerequisites must be met before Frank can obtain a loan: a) the money first has to be saved by someone. That means that someone must have already forgone consumption. They must have consumed less than they earned. And b) both parties, the borrower and the lender, must agree on the interest rate that the borrower will pay for the loan. If Frank makes his investment plans during a time when people are saving more because of economic insecurity and consequently not a lot is being invested and the demand for loans is low, then the interest rate will tend to be low. But if he goes looking for a loan at a time when many other entrepreneurs are seeking to make investments, then the demand for credit is high and the interest rate for loans will be comparatively higher. The willingness of individuals to save for the future is referred to as their “time preference rate.” It is the variable that expresses how much people are prepared to forgo present consumption in order to increase their future consumption. Societal and institutional developments can influence this willingness to save, this attitude towards the future, in a systematic way. The monetary system can also do so. More on that later. Every good has its price, determined by supply and demand. The same applies to loans. For loans, present goods (money units today) versus future goods (money units later) are exchanged. This price for money loans is often expressed as a percentage of the amount borrowed, and is called the interest rate. The interest rate reflects the willingness to save, i.e., people’s time preference rate. The interest rate shows how ready and willing people are to save and to forgo consumption, and for how long. It thus indirectly shows the quantity of real savings. There are always desirable investment projects that are not undertaken because there are not enough savings available. The projects simply cannot be carried out because people are not willing to forgo consumption for long enough. Let’s assume that the market interest rate in our city is 20%. But Frank only expects a rate of return of 15% on his project. So for Frank, this market interest rate is too high and he will not undertake his project. But if more were saved, the interest rate would fall, let’s say, to 10%. Now, Frank’s project and many others like it are potentially profitable. New investment projects are begun and can also be successfully brought to conclusion. That is because the real savings, the resources available for investment purposes, have risen. If, on the other hand, less is saved, then the interest rate rises, and fewer projects may be profitably undertaken. For this reason, it is very important that the interest rate is not distorted and manipulated. We will call a non-manipulated interest rate the natural rate of interest. If our fisherman-entrepreneur Frank has found a lender and they have agreed on the conditions for a loan, he can now carry out his investment as planned. And if his expectations as to how many fish he will be able to catch and how much he will be able to sell them for are correct, then he will make a profit. He will pay the lender the agreed-upon interest, and at the end of the loan period he will have paid off his debt. But if Frank has miscalculated the returns on his investment or his expectations are not fulfilled for reasons that he has no control over, he may have a cash flow problem. If he cannot find a way to resolve that problem by himself, for example by reducing his operating costs, or making use of an inheritance or a loan from someone else, he may well go bankrupt. What effect will it have on the economy of our city by the lake if Frank goes bankrupt and cannot repay his loan? Well, fisherman Frank will have to make changes. He must get back on his feet financially, and try to find ways to repay the remaining debt that he had before his bankruptcy. Frank had an employee, a young man who helped him construct the boat and who later helped him cast the net, who will now need to find a new job. And certainly, the lender will have to write off as a loss all or part of the loan he gave to Frank. Has anything else happened? No, no bank needs to be rescued due to Frank going bankrupt, and no politician needs to tell people on TV that “we need to rescue Frank. If Frank goes bankrupt, we will have to pay for that down the road. There is no alternative to rescuing Frank.” Up to this point, as we mentioned at the beginning of our story, no bank has been involved. For a bank that always holds a reserve of 100% of customer deposits at all times, the situation would be almost identical. Only that which had been already saved could then be invested. A bank with a 100% reserve ratio can only issue loans if there are depositors who have agreed to do without their deposited money and forgo consumption for a while. The bank would merely take on the role of an intermediary between lenders and borrowers. The bank checks out the creditworthiness of the potential borrower and puts its own capital on the line if the borrower turns out to be unable to pay back the loan. The bank makes its profit on the difference between the interest rate charged from borrowers and the interest rate that it pays to the depositors who fund the loans being made. In this kind of loan issuance, there is no expansion of the money supply. A saver, for example, a hunter working in our imaginary city, who forgoes consumption for a period of time, lends money to the bank, which in turn provides a loan to the fisherman. In essence, the monetary equivalent of real savings is transferred from one person to another. We now want to look at what happens when banks create new money by extending credit, in that they hold only a part of their customers’ deposits as reserves, while offering the rest as loans in the market. For the discussion that follows, it should be noted that this goes for all artificial credit expansion funded by money creation. The expansion of the money supply is more extensive the less reserves banks have to keep on hand to meet potential demands for redemption. If central banks also participate in this “let’s print money” game, as is the case in every country today, then the money creation pedal can really hit the metal. In the current monetary system in which money is no longer linked to anything, an unlimited expansion of the money supply can in theory be carried out at any time. Nevertheless, banks and central banks are “careful.” They know that they have to watch out and that they must not overdo their money creation. Ludwig von Mises put it cogently in his work Human Action, when he wrote: “If a thing has to be used as a medium of exchange, public opinion must not believe that the quantity of this thing will increase beyond all bounds. Inflation is a policy that cannot last forever.” Banks and the central banks are walking a tightrope: on the one hand, printing as much money as possible to maximize their own profits; on the other hand only so much that the prices of goods and services do not climb too fast and the purchasing power of money does not decline too fast. Otherwise, people would lose their trust in the money. “In contrast to a healthy monetary system, in a fractional reserve system, loanable funds may enter the market because banks can — given their legally privileged status — create money out of nothing. The bank simply prints a warehouse receipt and loans it to the fisherman, so that the fisherman can finance his investment project. You can see the enormous difference: no one here is forgoing consumption, and none of the depositors have declared to the bank that they would be willing to relinquish control of their deposits for an agreed-upon period of time.” On the contrary: the depositors wish to retain immediate access to their deposits at all times, in order to be able to buy consumption goods. That is the opposite of forgoing consumption. No one saved here, and thus no one made the financial means available to sustain the fisherman and his family during the construction of the boat and the making of the net. But the money creation and the warehouse receipt suggest the opposite to the fisherman. He believes that there are enough real resources available to bring his investment project to a successful conclusion. But what influence does money creation have on the general level of interest rates, in other words, on the price that must be paid for loans? Please consider this: more loans can now be offered. Ergo: interest rates will fall due to the money creation, even though this time, savings did not increase. They will be lower than the interest rates that would have prevailed in a free market, had money not been created out of thin air. The interest rate has been artificially lowered, and this has — at first glance — barely recognizable, but very considerable effects. We can no longer talk about a natural rate of interest, instead we must speak of an artificial or manipulated interest rate. Put yourself in the position of the fisherman. He needs a loan for his planned investment (the boat and the net). His calculations have shown him that the maximum interest rate that he can afford to pay is 15%. But say the current interest rate is 20%. This means that his investment will not pay off. In a system in which the money supply cannot be expanded by manipulation, he must save money himself or wait until other market participants have saved more money. Then the interest rate will very likely fall. Before that, he cannot start on his project. But if money is created out of thin air, the same effect occurs as when someone has saved the money: the interest rate falls. The fisherman of course observes the fall in the interest rate, and if he is offered an interest rate of 10%, he takes it. He invests. He thus initiates a project that he otherwise would not have begun if the money first had to be saved, or if the money had not been created out of thin air. Note that he cannot know whether the credit provided to him comes from real savings or out of thin air. After all, he is a fisherman and not a fortune teller. Have you ever gone on a hike in an area that you don’t know and had to rely on a compass? Without any hiking map? No? It actually works very well. The compass needle is a very reliable indicator of which direction you need to go. The same goes for the interest rate as a “compass needle” for entrepreneurial action. But this is only true for the natural rate of interest; manipulated interest rates cannot fulfill this function. A rate of interest artificially manipulated downwards is like a compass needle being influenced by a magnet which erroneously signals to investment-ready enterprises that people have saved enough. And thus more investment projects are started than can be successfully completed. The reason: the means of production and resources in the economy are too scarce to cover all projects. Ultimately, the quantity of possible profitable investments is limited by the quantity of real savings. And money created out of thin air does not create any new real resources. If no savings exist, the fisherman cannot feed his family and will have to stop his boat project. He cannot eat the newly printed warehouse receipts. Ludwig von Mises described this in Human Action: “The whole entrepreneurial class is, as it were, in the position of a master-builder whose task it is to erect a building out of a limited supply of building materials. If this man overestimates the quantity of the available materials, he drafts a plan for the execution of which the means at his disposal are not sufficient. He oversizes the groundwork and the foundations and only discovers later in the progress of the construction that he lacks the materials needed for the completion of the structure ... [There occurred] an inappropriate employment of the means at his disposal.” With this last sentence on the inappropriate employment of resources, Mises indicates a very important point. Resources and means of production are always scarce. If there were no scarcity, we would not have to save, we would not have to carry out profitability calculations and we would live in a utopia. Do you think you are living in some kind of utopia? We don’t think so either. For that reason, it is important that means of production and resources are allocated to the right uses — to the correct, and most importantly, to the most urgent use at the time. This means that the resources are not wasted and are optimally used. Waste makes us all poorer. But what happens when new credit, not backed by real savings, finds its way to entrepreneurs throughout the economy? In the beginning, the artificial expansion creates an artificial economic boom; demand increases everywhere … for workers, which raises wages, and for other factors of production, which also increase in price. Prices of consumer goods increase. Why? Because wages have risen and workers can now afford more than before. Entrepreneurs feel that their investment decisions were right — their selling prices are rising, after all. They expand production further. Other entrepreneurs, who up to now had been holding back, also decide to invest; they now want a piece of the pie as well. The investment plans get more and more daring. Workers are pushed to their physical limits and are working overtime. Their wages continue to climb. The demand for loans increases. Because workers receive a wage increase and the interest rate is so low, they also take on more loans. Some to buy a house, others want a new car, paid for with debt of course. Everything rises: wages, real estate prices, share prices. Everyone is happy. It appears that we can automatically become richer without having to work hard, without doing any saving, and without having to forgo any present consumption. A feverish euphoria spreads. The demand for loans keeps going up, with the effect that interest rates start to rise … Question: When interest rates start to rise, what happens to investments that were only profitable because the interest rate had been artificially lowered? They become unprofitable. That is clear, right? The boom must then come to a halt. The problem would not exist if the necessary and natural economic correction were allowed to happen. We know that this might at first seem pretty heartless. But shouldn’t enterprises that only were profitable due to manipulated interest rates now be allowed to suffer the consequences and go bankrupt? Those enterprises are wasting the scare resources of society. You don’t want us all to become poorer, do you? Do you remember the concept of the “we create money from thin air, and create wealth that way” model of economics? The problem is that it cannot work. Most politicians do not understand this. And they are at this point enjoying their time in the limelight. They make big speeches about how the economy needs to be jump-started. A lot of investment credit is handed out — created out of thin air of course. Now the state has to intervene, they say: “We have to junk all the old cars that are making our streets unsightly. And everyone will receive money as a reward. Cash for clunkers! Also, those who are going to buy a new refrigerator will be subsidized: we will call that a CO2 abatement reward. And you central bankers, do something, please lower the interest rates so that the bankers can once again hand out cheap credit.” Does this sound familiar? If the interest rates are continually set lower, an economy becomes dependent on cheap money, like a drug addict who can’t make it through the day without their regular fix. After the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008, governments and central banks worldwide immediately set the monetary lever to “rescue mode” with permanently cheap interest rates. All governments, banks, and financial companies that looked like they might go under have been bailed out — whatever it took. Note that we didn’t come up with the phrase “whatever it takes.” That line comes from the ECB boss “Super Mario” Draghi. In formulating that line, he was referring to saving the euro, when someone asked him about its future. Believe us: the elite politicians (and by “elite,” we are referring to their position, and not to the quality of their work) recognize the coming danger. They know exactly what is at risk when interest rates climb and the unavoidable correction comes. They are only buying time with their bail-out policies. The situation will not improve. Quite the contrary! But who does it help if politicians buy time? First and foremost, the politicians themselves. They serve one or two terms in office, and then they slide into a safe job as a minister, state secretary, or some other lucrative office, and in the end they will have earned a fat pension for their retirement. A pension so high that you have to work your entire life to pay for it. Don’t let yourself be fooled by politicians and their so-called “experts.” An economy does not become richer by creating more and more money. First there has to be savings, and then capital and consumer goods can be manufactured. This is the only way a society can become richer. Let’s look at exactly what the unavoidable correction looks like to this “money out of thin air” scheme. Interest rates rise. Costs skyrocket upwards, as do wages, because companies have taken on projects wildly, and have hired lots of workers. Think of our fisherman. Suddenly the cost of wood for his boat has risen, his assistant wants more money or he will leave for a better-paying job, and paying for food and other necessities for his family is getting more and more expensive. That is because the prices of consumer goods are increasing, because workers and employees have more money and because consumer goods production has fallen a bit. Our fisherman no longer fishes, but is working on his boat. During the time he is working on it, fish production falls and the price of fish climbs unless more has been saved. But this was not the case here. Fish has not been cured and stored beforehand to be sold in the market. The only thing that was produced was more money. People are not willing to wait until the boat is ready. They want more fish now. Pressure on the fisherman increases. Interest rates and costs are strangling him financially. At the same time, he sees that he can now earn good profits by just fishing from the shore. He ultimately stops his project. His boat and net are unfinished, so the resources he has used go to waste. Society’s scarce savings have been wasted. In the same way, the artificial boom breaks down and turns into a bust in our economy today. The rising interest rates lead to a situation in which additional credit for new investments is only provided very hesitantly, the bust intensifies, and economic growth collapses. In addition — and this is very important — it becomes clear that a lot of investments had been identified as profitable only because interest rates were artificially low, but they no longer are, because the interest rates have risen. Companies have to cut back or go bankrupt. Workers lose their jobs, and those who are able to remain on the payroll have to accept pay cuts. Consumption falls drastically. Prices look like they will fall. Loans provided in the boom can no longer be paid back. This in turn has as a logical result that the money quantity that was expanded by issuing these loans now threatens to shrink. The bottom line: Banks have to write off claims, which tears ugly holes in their balance sheets, which then have to be filled by taxes that you have to pay. This is done in such a skillful manner that you don’t notice it, at least not at first. Or new debt is run up. And you won’t notice that at first, either, but at some point, when your money buys less, you will. You definitely notice it when your net paycheck or pension no longer stretches to cover your household budget. The economic correction that occurs should be viewed positively. After all, it ends a sham boom and corrects it. Scarce resources are finally allocated to their most efficient use and are no longer misused in unprofitable projects. Even if the income of some workers falls during the correction, when looked at correctly, that is not a problem. After all, when demand falls, the prices of consumer goods will also fall and people can buy more for less money. But wait … We have not taken the central bank into account. The experts who work there are very sensitive to falling prices! They will lower the interest rates again, the banking system will be supplied yet again with even more liquidity and the business of credit expansion will ramp up again, to prevent prices from falling. But why is the economic recession not allowed to happen and prices not allowed to fall? Very simple. Because falling prices in a pure paper money system would trigger a so-called deflationary spiral, which would reveal as unprofitable investment projects that were only started as a result of the artificial credit expansion. And because we have lived through many such ups and downs in the past decades, a huge number of unprofitable investments would come to light, with unforeseeable consequences. All those highly indebted companies and people would now have huge problems, because when prices fall, it is harder to pay back debts. Individuals and companies with a lot of debt would have to go bankrupt in droves. Not to speak of the biggest debtor in the economy: the state. And if the debtors are no longer paying their debts, the banking system will ultimately collapse. Politicians would have a hard time explaining all of this, and politicians would be run out of office. And what would happen then, what would be the worst effect? Because the vast majority of people do not know that the boom was triggered by money created out of thin air, the politicians will now be called on to act! This is a vicious circle. It gives one pause to consider that most people are robbed by inflation. The following comparison applies to this call for help: someone breaks into your house at night and the person who broke in is the same person you call on for help in finding the burglar. You just are not aware that they are the same person. Every artificial boom must be followed by an economic bust. The bust exposes the damage from the misallocated investments from the boom. The partially completed fishing boat reveals misallocated resources. Those resources have been wasted and are not available for other projects. The quantity of capital goods — which determines the productive capacity of an economy — has been reduced (relative to what it could have been). We have become poorer as a society. The insidious thing about these artificially created booms and busts and bail-out orgies are the changes and shifts that they cause in the income and wealth structure of a society. These are irreversible. Purchasing power and assets shift — the tendency is from the bottom to the top. A few profit at the expense of the many. The trend is for the rich to get richer and the poor poorer. We already described the effects of inflation in the previous chapter, in detail. Upon closer inspection, we must conclude that our present monetary system is inherently destructive. Interest rates have to be continually lowered to prevent the exposure of the misallocation of resources that was covered up by prior booms. You may ask yourself what happens if the central bank never allowed interest rates to rise, but lowered them at the slightest sign of a crisis, or maintained them at a rate close to zero. Wouldn’t that prevent the economic correction and allow the boom to continue without interruption? Wouldn’t it help our fisherman if he could obtain credit at a zero interest rate? Wouldn’t it prevent the deflationary spiral? Perhaps he could keep himself above water a bit longer with help from the low or zero interest rate, and stick with his project against the wishes of the consumers who would prefer not to wait any longer to eat fish. However, due to the money production and the “free” interest rates, his costs will continue to rise, faster and faster. Zero interest rates do not magically produce goods. Rather, they lead to new bubbles and additional malinvestment. At most, what artificially low interest rates can do is postpone the inevitable, inasmuch as the fisherman is pulling economic resources away from other worthwhile projects. We cannot get around the fact that too many big projects were started and that not enough real resources are available to finish them all. Continually creating new money with zero interest rates is not a solution to the misuse of resources. And if the situation continues, in the end, so much money will have been produced, so much debt will be in the system that people will lose their trust in the money, and our current bad money will become useless as a means of exchange. The deflationary spiral has been prevented at the cost of hyperinflation. But maybe the politicians will head this off ahead of time and reduce over-indebtedness in some other way. The other possibilities, such as a debt “haircut,” currency reform, or a wealth tax are very painful. More on that in Chapter 8. The highly likely resulting loss of confidence and trust in the money is completely ignored by so-called economic experts. Does the following line ring a bell? “We foresee a slight economic recovery, and we see no threat of inflation at this time.” What will you do when you see that the purchasing power of your money has fallen and is likely to go down further? You will attempt to get rid of it, right? Just like millions and millions of others. Probably all at the same time. And what happens when demand for money collapses in this way and demand for real goods explodes? Prices will rise, faster than most people can imagine. And what do central banks have to do when the prices rise — after all, it is their job to keep prices stable, right? They cut back on money production and raise interest rates. And now the question comes: Can interest rates be raised in a monetary system in which there is more debt than ever? Instead of us providing an answer, we turn to Ludwig von Mises again. You will see that there is in fact economic literature available that explains the problems created by printing money. The following comes from an essay Mises wrote in 1931: “Sooner or later, it must become evident that the economic boom turns out to have been built on sand. Because sooner or later, credit expansion through the creation of additional money must come to a standstill. The banks could be forced, either because they wanted to or because of strong pressure from outside, to not carry this policy on forever. The advancing increase of the money supply leads to advancing price increases. But inflation can only continue so long as the opinion exists that it will stop in the foreseeable future. But if the view wins out that inflation will not end, then panic breaks out. The public already takes into account the future price increases in its view of money and goods, so that the prices leap excessively, and as the use of this money compromised by monetary expansion falls, people flee into foreign money, to precious metals, to tangible assets, eventually to barter; in short, the currency collapses.” The Austrian school economists in the first half of the 20th century, primarily Ludwig von Mises, described the processes that are triggered when credit is expanded. One of Mises’s students, Friedrich A. von Hayek, won the Nobel Prize in economics in 1974 for his Austrian monetary and business cycle theory. You may now with justification ask yourself why someone who won such an important prize has been mostly ignored by governments and decision-makers and why he continues to be ignored. We will return to this question in Chapter 9. Summary: Money creation through credit expansion leads to fake and unsupportable economic booms. Investments are undertaken that only appear profitable because money is created out of thin air and the interest rate is artificially lowered. But real resources are insufficient to successfully bring those investments to completion. Sooner or later, cost increases and higher interest rates expose these malinvestments. Unfortunately the subsequent unavoidable and wholly necessary economic correction is politically unpopular, and is fought with additional interest rate cuts. Society becomes poorer as a result of the resulting malinvestments. Capital goods lose value, valuable time is lost, and unemployment increases. The monetary expansion causes redistribution of income and wealth within society — as a rule, from the bottom income classes to those at the top. The rich become richer and the poor get poorer. The core of the destruction should be attributed to the paper money system. If the policy of interest rate cuts and ever stronger monetary expansion continues, people eventually lose trust in the money. At the end of this path is the unavoidable hyperinflation and a collapse of the monetary system. 7 In economics, the boat and net are called “capital goods,” meaning goods that are not themselves consumed, but are used to produce consumer goods.
