# What Inflation Does to People

## Source Metadata

- Chapter number: 7
- TOC index: 13
- Part: main
- EPUB src: text/part0012.html
- Extraction mode: single-source

## Extracted Text

6. What inflation does to people “People burdened by debt at some point take on the habit of turning to others for help instead of turning into an economic and moral anchor for their family and for the wider society.” - Jörg Guido Hülsmann We don’t know how old you are but if you are no longer young, then you probably remember how it was “back then.” Perhaps you pine for “the good old days.” You have probably told your children or grandchildren how good things were in the good old days. But what exactly was it that was so good back then? Compared to those days, we have everything in abundance now! What starts as a feeling turns out to be reality, when looked at more closely. Life has become more hectic, don’t you think? And that applies to all of life: family and career. Combining family and career gets harder and harder. Work pressure increases more and more and the family often gets short-changed. There are more and more divorces. There are more and more single mothers. And why is that? What are the hidden causes of such problems in our society? It seems that society has adopted more of a short-term throw-away consumer attitude. Many questions arise. But you might now skeptically object, saying: “You don’t really want to suggest that all these problems are related to the monetary system, do you? That is outrageous!” Let us explain before you close the book in exasperation … Let’s return to our small imaginary city by the lake. There, everything is still going well. The monetary system is a competitive, private money system; the king does not meddle with it. People use gold and silver coins as a means of payment or use warehouse receipts in their stead. This all works great, as before. And the king rarely gets involved in the life of his subjects. The few taxes that he demands go to maintain a small army that protects the property of his citizens from attack from foreign kings or marauders. The people in his city live in safety, think in a future-oriented manner, and save a lot. Citizens tend to save money first for things that they will need later. When someone needs a loan, the money for that loan must have already been saved by someone else who had forgone consumption. But taking on debt is only done in exceptional cases and emergencies. Following in the footsteps of his ancestors, our fisherman also behaves this way, heading up a profitable family enterprise. The idea would never enter his mind to borrow money to buy a television or take a vacation trip. And why would he? Everything has a tendency to get cheaper over time. The fisherman has also never taken out loans to run his family business. He always paid for investments out of retained earnings. Once, when he wanted to buy a bigger boat, he sold shares of his boat to investors, who had previously saved. Why burden yourself with debts unnecessarily when prices are falling so that repayment will be more difficult? Most people in the city operate under the “first save, then buy” strategy for both small and big purchases. And that includes purchasing a house or a condominium. This is easy to understand, because prices in the city tend to fall over the long term. Conversely, this means that the purchasing power of money in the city continually rises. This happens because the production of goods is always increasing and the money supply increases more slowly, given the pace at which new gold or silver can be dug up. Because goods prices do not rise, it does not make sense to burden yourself unnecessarily with debt. Things are not “running away,” as it were. Everything is loose and relaxed. Anyone who has patience is rewarded with falling prices. Saving is very easy and uncomplicated. You need not be a stock market genius to become wealthy; just save cash, which gains more and more in value over the long term. Our fisherman has buried a sack of gold coins in his cellar for his retirement and for his heirs. A gold coin that will buy a good suit today will still do so in 50 years. And it will most likely pay for a nice shirt and tie to go with it as well. The general stability and reliability of the economic environment influence people’s personalities and the way they plan their lives. Long-term planning pays off. Above all, saving pays off. People share a healthy faith in God and a relaxed attitude to life. Entrepreneurs in our city finance their projects mainly from their own capital (equity). They are conservative and careful with money. Debt is avoided. People understand that too much debt takes away choices and restricts opportunities, so low debt levels are important. It allows them to be independent and flexible. Our fisherman does not need to take out a mortgage. After saving for ten years, he buys a house for himself and his family, with his own money. He does not have business debt. He acts independently. He can even take a vacation when he wants to. He does not have to labor at jobs he does not want to do in order to pay off a mountain of debt. He can kick back and think, take long trips, or take care of his family; he has choices. He has both feet planted firmly on solid ground. It is of course not the case that credit is totally unknown. The entrepreneurs in the city do take on credit from time to time. But they don’t do so to excess. Remember that the existing monetary system is 100% reserve commodity money: money from thin air at artificially low interest rates does not exist. And the money that is available for credit — this must be said again — first has to be saved. Someone must have chosen to forgo consumption. In addition, the entrepreneurs only take on credit when they are reasonably certain that they can meet all their loan obligations. They calculate their investments extremely carefully and they build up solid safety buffers for cases in which business is bad. The use of external capital (borrowed money) is also correspondingly low. Because people rarely take on debt and because they usually consume less than they produce, the capital stock increases and both the people and the city get wealthier. And this increase in wealth benefits everyone, because purchasing power continually grows. At the same time, the taxes raised by the king are minimal. Usually, a family in the city only needs one income to take care of its needs and look after grandma, who lives with them. Women have choices too, and can thus focus on raising the children if they want to do so. Uh, oh. Now we have opened a can of worms. This image goes completely against today’s concept of the role of the genders. But don’t get us wrong. Nothing would be further from the truth than us wanting women to focus on child-raising instead of working and fulfilling themselves in a career. Yet the question still remains, how many women work today because they really want to, rather than because their family needs that income to live ... We are of the strong opinion that — after taking out taxes, social transfers, and permanent monetary devaluation — people have too little income left to be able to voluntarily decide for themselves whether one parent should focus on raising children or not. As a result, more and more small children and very young kids spend their days in state-supported day care centers. Only experts can know whether those day care centers are right for small children and what long-term effects reduced contact with the parents in the first few years have on them. But the fact remains that today, the option hardly exists to have one of the parents taking care of the kids during the day. And most women are — yes, we know, it is not politically correct to say this — biologically just better at that. They can breast-feed the baby and are generally better at calming babies and kids down than are men. But it doesn’t matter, because continual price increases and high taxes take this choice away from parents. But why are the taxes so high? Because someone has to pay to keep those day care centers open, right? Circular, isn’t it? Parents are soaked financially to pay for day care services which, without that soaking, they might not need in the first place. And who does this help? Who gains power by doing this? You know this already … Back to our small city. There, the parents can freely decide whether one parent will remain at home with the kids or whether both will have a career outside the home. They are not under the financial pressure that both of them have to work to provide their family with sufficient income. This is because the taxes in the city are extremely low. Of course, there are some families who don’t have enough money and so both parents have to work. But that is an exception. And when the parents want to work, they pay a nanny — out of their own pockets. Or maybe grandma takes care of the kids, if she lives with the family. In any case, no one in the city is dependent on welfare payments from the king. (Nor does he provide any.) It is the people themselves who provide help and support to each other in times of trouble. You probably are now thinking that the authors can’t be serious. People supporting each other? That’s totally unrealistic! Well, today in our fast-paced world, in which everything is getting more expensive, the tax burden is becoming more and more intolerable, and insecurity with regard to wealth and property is huge, it is getting much harder for people to help each other. But hand on your heart. Have you never helped someone? Have you never tossed a coin into the hat of a street musician? Have you never given a friend advice, or helped a family member? Whoever believes that family and friends won’t help each other is the one living in a fantasy world. In our city, the willingness to help is strong. The people in the city — thanks to the low taxes and lack of fast rising prices — also have the means to help and are not only materialistic. They hardly have to think about their savings and investments due to the stability of money. They also do not have to invest all their money in a way that earns the highest returns, for fear of the future and of their creditors. Non-commercial uses of income are thus very common. People do not live under a crushing mountain of debt that forces them to work. They have enough time to work pro bono, as volunteers, and to help others. Envy is almost unknown. And envy and the materialist striving for financial gains are exactly the factors that prevent people from supporting others in need. And as the king does not provide any welfare payments that could be used as an excuse not to help, the willingness to help is very high. And now let us bring up a very important point. We have already discussed the fact that in our city, private people hardly have any debt and that only enterprises and business people use credit to finance themselves. The result is that the interest rates in our city are quite low. The lower the total interest that has to be paid in relation to the productive capacity of an economy, the lower the interest burden on the whole system. And for exactly this reason, life in the city is not as hectic. Of course, people have to do their work; the city has not become a utopia of leisure. But they don’t rush through their day. “More and more and faster and faster” is unknown. People have time for the nicer things in life. They often take time off, take care of their kids themselves, they have time to reflect, they can have cultural discussions, they can participate in sports, and they put a great emphasis on education and manners. And there is time for spiritual experiences too. In short, most people are relaxed, in balance, happy, and content. But one day a man named John Law comes to town and pays the king a visit. (That this man has the same name as the man who caused one of the biggest paper money bubbles of all time in the 18th century, is just a coincidence.) Law’s visit comes at a very good time for the king. Recently, some citizens have suggested that they could take care of their own security, at a higher quality than the king is currently providing, and cheaper than the king too. This new trend towards self-sufficiency and independence is threatening to the king’s position. Who knows, the people might think to ask, “why do we need a sovereign at all?” Of course, the king is not pleased, since he makes a good living off of his security services for the people. People might conclude that they do not want his services anymore, and then he would lose most of his income. What to do? The king needs to find a justification for his own position, maybe some set of new services only he can provide. He would need to convince the people that only he can perform these new tasks. Or, at least, that he could do it better than the citizens themselves. In this way, he would again make the citizens dependent upon him. But how to do this? Most new services would cost a lot of money that the king doesn’t have. Not to mention the costs of advertising and educating the public regarding their need for the new services. So he plans to set up a public radio station that will talk about the importance of the new tasks, and he plans to nationalize schools in order to win over his subjects in their earliest years. But he somehow needs to pay for all of this. How? Raise taxes? Not now. The king does not dare risk a tax revolt. Thank God for the new advisor who just arrived! John Law suggests to the king that he get together with the gold warehouses and grant them the legal right to issue warehouse receipts over and above the quantity of gold actually deposited. The additional issuance of warehouse receipts would increase the money supply. In addition, Law suggests that the king get rid of that “barbarous relic,” gold, in the near future, and introduce a progressive modern paper currency. Paper being easier to increase, which brings with it big advantages. If loans could be created out of thin air, people would not need to save as much and could fulfill their wishes immediately. Through increases in the money supply, the king could afford to undertake additional projects which would create jobs. The lowered interest rates would trigger an economic boom. And, the king could also take advantage of the credit himself. The king could then finance all kinds of benefits and welfare for the people. All of that would distract people — and, what is much more important for the king, it would make the people more dependent on him. The king finds it hard to wrap his mind around all this, but he follows John Law’s suggestion and pulls all gold coins out of circulation and exchanges them for freshly printed paper money notes. Trading in gold and owning gold is made illegal. The currency printing press works hard. The new paper currency circulates throughout the realm. Because they only hold fractional reserves, the banks can create money out of thin air at favorable rates and lend it to businesses. The result is predictable. It is like a dam breaking. The interest rates fall, and business owners start all kinds of new projects. During the boom, almost all the prices rise: wages, shares, real estate. Everyone is happy: workers, company managers and entrepreneurs, bankers, shareholders, and the king. And everyone begins to believe that people can get rich quickly, without having to work hard. During the artificially created boom which was unleashed by credit expansion and euphorically celebrated by the media, the people of our city — who had up until that time been so relaxed and calm — are becoming stressed out and tired. Not being used to getting so much money without working, many people act irresponsibly. Short-term speculative operations and headline-making company takeovers are financed with the new money. An almost feverish party mood and great optimism ripples through the economy. People get the idea that it is possible to earn huge profits in a short amount of time, and they pursue those possibilities. The times change. Hard work, saving, and discipline are no longer necessary to get rich. Rather, stock market speculation or risky investments make (some) people rich overnight. Later, the grisly end finally comes: the inevitable bursting of the speculative investment bubble, which was not financed by real savings but by the creation of new money. The economic collapse demoralizes an entire generation. Wealth disappears as fast as it had appeared. In their sudden poverty, many throw their moral principles overboard. The new booms and busts that recur in the city have devastating social effects. Incredible, isn’t it? Did you think something like this could happen? These are the effects of a new monetary order! The king finds the new economic cycles of benefit to himself. He and John Law celebrate behind closed doors. This is because the new financial instability threatens the economic existence of many people and provides the impetus for additional regulations and government interventions. The king now has a new field of activity. He regulates the banks and the insurance companies, creates state welfare safety nets like state unemployment insurance, and bails out companies with a lot of employees that have gotten themselves into trouble. But wholly aside from the devastating business cycles that now appear in our city, the state paper money is a cultural shock. Enterprises are relatively fast to act, but it takes a while for people to take the step of applying for a private loan. But because the prices of goods and services don’t stop rising, and because the interest rates have fallen due to the additional money (created out of thin air), people start to have a change of heart. More and more, those who saved before buying now experience rising prices before they can save up the required capital. And those who act immediately and go into debt appear to be the winners. They are already living in their new homes and enjoying their credit-financed new goods — which continually rise in price — while the careful ones are still saving. Our fisherman is among the careful ones who have not embraced the new cheap-money ways. He hoards his savings in cash, as his father, grandfather and great-grandfather did. Being the upright and law abiding citizen that he is, he gives up his gold and in return is given paper money. The king is now continually printing new money while the banking sector provides credit out of thin air. The effect of this constant supply of new money is that the prices no longer fall, the way they had in the past, but rise. As the fisherman retires, he finds out that he is sitting on a mountain of paper money that is no longer sufficient to pay for his living expenses. A frightening realization for the fisherman and many of his generation! The values upon which the previously successful city society was based are now questioned and shaken to their core. Saving, careful long-term thinking, and planning no longer bring the self-sufficiency they did before. Instead of being a proud and independent owner of his capital, which his father and grandfather were, the fisherman is now practically a have-not. It comes in handy that the king has introduced a state pension system. It functions on the principle of a pay-as-you-go scheme. The active working population sends “contributions” (taxes) to the king, who then sends them on to the retirees. The children of the fisherman are quite happy about this system, as they do not have to support their poor father in his retirement. “Society” now does that. One of the fisherman’s sons decides not to have children of his own. Why should he, when it is so stressful? After all, the costs of raising children are borne by the parents, but the “benefits” (the taxes collected from the children once they start working) are socialized and paid to all retirees, even those who are childless. Would it amaze you to learn that the birth rate in our city now falls sharply? If you expected the new monetary order in the city to leave the social structures of the city untouched, you were wrong. Holding cash is becoming more and more unattractive. Corporate stock and other financial assets are no longer bought after careful saving, but on credit. The continual rise in prices devalues debts. Financial assets and real estate can be offered as collateral for loans in order to take on more debt and to buy more goods before the prices rise further. This makes financial assets much more attractive than they were at the time of the gold currency. Because of this, the prices of financial assets and real estate rise relative to the prices of other goods and services, and most importantly they rise faster than wages. Instead of saving for ten years to buy a home as his father did, the fisherman’s son now has to wait 20 years before he can buy one. Because it takes longer and longer to save enough, rising socially also becomes more difficult. Anyone who owns assets like company shares has an advantage, because the share prices are rising rapidly. And anyone who has assets can use them as collateral to obtain additional loans and buy even more real estate and shares, before the price rises even more and it becomes too expensive for middle-class people to buy. The new monetary order shatters the old concept of society. It is replaced by a class of asset-rich super-wealthy people on the one side, and a non-asset owning class of poor people on the other. Is it any wonder that the paper money refashions society? Anyone who can, buys stuff on credit before prices rise. It is a brutal competitive battle. The faster you are, the better deals you get. Or to put it another way: the faster you go into debt, the better. The pressure is intense: you go into debt to obtain goods, and then you have to run like a hamster on a wheel to pay off that debt. This is in contrast with older times: The natural abhorrence against debt that people had in earlier days is disappearing fast. The seductive temptation of cheap money pulls many into a debt-driven lifestyle. People feel better when they are not alone in their circumstances — and now, almost everyone has debt. And what about the business environment? Does it suffer, too? We have already seen how the ongoing economic cycles are demoralizing. Businessmen change how they run their companies in a fundamental way in a paper money economy. Company managers and entrepreneurs take on more risky investments. Money and credit appears to be available in abundance. Debts rise, and with it the entire debt burden, despite the continually falling interest rates. But don’t get the idea that interest rates are the problem, and that if they were reduced to zero, people would be free of their interest bondage, as some interest rate critics claim. This is total nonsense. Interest rates arise out of our nature as human beings. Interest rates exist because of how we act. We prefer to reach our goals sooner rather than later. People prefer present goods, such as existing money, as opposed to future goods, for example money available in ten years. Anyone offering future goods (money in ten years) against highly valued present goods (money today) will have to accept a discount (for example 10,000 dollars in ten years for 8,000 dollars today). Interest is implied in the logic of human action, to put it in economic terms. The so-called time preference, i.e., the preference to consume sooner rather than later, manifests itself in the interest rate. If people are more long-term oriented, and thus willing to forgo present needs to have more in the future, then economists speak of a low time preference. But if people are consumption-oriented and thus are not willing to forgo things so easily, but would rather borrow money to make their purchases now, then they speak of a high time preference. The greater the time preference, the higher the rate of discount on future goods. Underlying this discount rate is the natural interest rate. And it cannot be eliminated in a world in which people live. A prohibition on interest would be fatal, because credit has an important allocation function in a market economy. Credit markets channel resources from savers to investors and workers, and this in turn allows for enormous increases in societal wealth over time. Back to our city. Financing from equity capital (capital of one’s own) and retained earnings is falling. Credit is the new “in” thing. The fisherman’s son quickly understands this. He was just able to prevent the family business from going under by discarding his father’s thrifty values and taking on a loan at the same bank that gave him a mortgage to buy his house. The fisherman’s son and his contemporaries are becoming dependent on banks and the financial industry, which now has its hands in everything. The financial sector is the true guiding force of the economy — thanks to the privilege of being able to create money out of thin air. This privilege generates its own power, as if by magic. And company managers and entrepreneurs are drawn in by this magic power. Having fast access to the source of the new money becomes more important: having connections in the financial industry is essential for business success. Solidity, long-term thinking, and a skill in creating better products at lower prices recedes into the background. Just as the new monetary system favors those who already have money, it also favors large, established enterprises at the expense of small ones, which can offer little by way of collateral for new loans. (And never mind the ones that do not even come into being due to the power of the established ones …) After all, people now need credit. Savings alone are no longer adequate to start a new company. The friends of the king are particularly close to the banking system. They have fast and easy access to the source of new money. They create new banks and industry conglomerates. They are very willing to take risks, because they can assume that if they run into trouble, they will be bailed out — with new money. Short-term thinking focused on fast profits spreads. This is because the stability of continually falling prices no longer exists. And economic booms and busts follow one after another. This makes long-term planning harder. Insecurity rises. Instead of engaging in the creation of long-term value, managers now attempt to exploit the boom phases to make as much money as possible. Because who knows what will happen in five or ten years? In addition, asset prices continue to rise. And in order not to fall behind, many prioritize making a lot of money fast. Unscrupulous, selfish, short-term thinking managers are more and more common in the once peaceful city by the lake. Previously, managers identified with their company and its workers. Loyalty and a sense of close connection to the owners of the company — who in some instances were associated with the company for several generations — was more important to people than making fast money. Now, one debt-financed company takeover — also called leveraged buyout — follows another. Sometimes the managers don’t even know who the owner of their company is. Are you surprised that a long-term relationship with the company is becoming more and more rare? Their own private mountain of debt also makes managers more short-sighted and focused on material gain. They change employers more often — always in the search of a job that pays more. Business values like integrity, solidarity, and caring for the employees, as well as a broad perspective, are lost in favor of a short-term drive for profits. Whoever can get a mega-bonus goes for it, even if he has to do things that will hurt the company over the long term. Oh, and the king? We almost forgot about him. How does the new money system affect him? The king also starts to go into debt. Based on Law’s advice, he has come up with various social welfare programs for his citizens. He introduces insurance for cases in which someone is unemployed or injured. Mothers receive a child-raising allowance after the birth of a child. This is all paid for out of taxes — which are higher than they were before — and … with debt. Newly created money. Every day, the king thinks up new ideas to help his subjects. He allows himself the luxury of setting up a committee of experts who all get a high salary from him. What they do to earn their money is to provide the king with ideas on what additional services he can introduce and how they should be organized. It is a dream for many intellectuals to be able to reorder the world to their liking! They think they know what is best for everyone. The paper money system provides them with the financial means to implement their schemes. Does it surprise anyone that journalists, commentators, teachers, and professors do not question the paper money system? The king profits from the general instability and insecurity created by the new money system. Because entrepreneurs and business owners take on more and more debt, they increasingly get into financial trouble, particularly during times when interest rates rise. One of the first measures they then take is to lay workers off, especially in a recession. Unemployment poses a more difficult problem to those affected than it did before, when people had little or no debt. Due to the high levels of debt, people now have very little room for error, and even a short period of unemployment can put families in financial jeopardy. Many do not have financial reserves — people have gotten used to not saving. Financial problems are not good for family life. Particularly when people used to be able to afford anything they wanted — paid for on credit of course — and suddenly the exact opposite is true. It is just as well that as of late the king has shown a willingness to care more for the needs of his subjects. They can count on him. He is always there for them, a true caring and providing leader. And the king intended this: he wanted to make people dependent on him and his social welfare programs. And his plan works. Instead of taking care of their own security and not relying on the king at all, as the people originally wanted, they now have different worries. In the city, people think more and more short term. The social time preference rate rises. Less is saved. Economic growth, which was so impressive in the past, slows down. Hans-Hermann Hoppe, in his book Democracy—The God That Failed, describes the effects of today’s common public social welfare programs: “Every form of government welfare — the compulsory wealth or income transfer from ‘haves’ to ‘have-nots’ — lowers the value of a person’s membership in an extended family household system as a social system of mutual cooperation and help and assistance. Marriage loses value. For parents the value and importance of a good upbringing (education) of their own children is reduced. Correspondingly, for children less value will be attached and less respect paid to their own parents.” (pp. 182–83) This sounds terribly conservative, doesn’t it? So perhaps it is time to set this book aside for a moment and reflect. A family also has practical constraints that derive from scarcity. The state cannot change that and abolish scarcity. The state merely uses the welfare benefits to give us the illusion that it can. And people let themselves be fooled. The state is not able to magically create resources. It can only spend what it has already extracted from civil society, whether through taxes or through money creation. Why do so many marriages end in divorce? No one seems to want to go without or to do with less these days. Selfishness is spreading. People want more and more of everything. And they want it now. Family is increasingly not part of that picture. If having a lot of children was a good way to ensure one’s old age in the past, today, that would mean the risk of poverty. And when parents have kids, then they send them to day care. In an interview with the Ludwig von Mises Institute of Germany, journalist Birgit Kelle, a mother of four, said, “The state takes our money, our time, and — as of recently — also our children, and then it comes back to us with its more than 150 different family-oriented political (welfare) programs, through which they merely give back to us that which they previously took away from us.” A state paper money system is a true cultural shock for a society used to good money, like our good old city. Instead of waiting patiently, people are pressed into debt slavery. People drive prices up due to the goods they purchase with new loans they have taken on. Society becomes more materialistic. Taking on debt and investing money starts to take on a central role in people’s lives. In earlier times, people saved gold coins in cash. Today, one has to go into debt and spend a lot of time investing money in order to stay afloat. There is less and less time for the nice things in life, culture, sports, and family. Because in a debt-driven economy, time is money. There used to be stability. Hard work, thrift and foresight paid off. Today, assets and acquisitions are unsafe — the motto is to make as much money as possible so as not to fall behind or go under. Otherwise you might become a kind of ward of the paternalistic state and get caught in its net. Does it surprise you that psychological illnesses in the population have increased in the recent past, in a population that is under more and more pressure? Summary: What occurred in our imaginary city in a short period of time, practically within a generation, has taken place in the real world over the past 100 years or so. And it is not over yet. The destruction of the gold standard and the turn to immaterial state money have permanently changed people’s behavior. Inflationary paper money has created a debt economy. It has made people more and more dependent on the financial industry and the state — which both have expanded to an ominous degree. The slavery to high levels of debt together with the welfare state, also sponsored by paper money, have torn people loose from their roots. And to the extent to which people become dependent on the “provider-state,” they are left less dependent on the help of those close to them, primarily the family. Social bonds break. The ethical mortar that holds society together falls apart. This is because the family communicates values and norms. The collapse of the family in the wake of bad money and the welfare state also promotes a serious moral crisis. In short: bad money makes people increasingly dependent, adolescent, socially isolated, torn from their roots, careless, unscrupulous, egotistical, materialistic, superficial, stressed, and depressed.
