# What Happens When the State Intervenes in Everything

## Source Metadata

- Chapter number: 8
- TOC index: 14
- Part: main
- EPUB src: text/part0013.html
- Extraction mode: single-source

## Extracted Text

7. What happens when the state intervenes in everything “The idea that there is a third system — between socialism and capitalism, as its supporters say — a system as far away from socialism as it is from capitalism but that retains the advantages and avoids the disadvantages of each — is pure nonsense.” - Ludwig von Mises What do the monetary system, the health care system, the education system, and the energy sector have in common? Right. They are all run by the state, at least to a large extent. Most people don’t even question why this is so. Let us now turn the discussion to why state intervention in the economy is bad. The ideal situation would be that the state does not intervene anywhere. Are you shocked that we would say such a thing? Notice the way politicians react to a new law that has gone into effect — they immediately begin proposing improvements to it. If political decisions and laws were well-thought-out and meaningful, they would not have to be modified right after being passed. By the way, “intervention” is really a misleading term — it really means that the state does not let the people pursue their own goals, but forces its own goals on them. The state does intervene with physical violence or the threat of physical violence. Roland Baader in his book Freiheitsfunken II (Sparks of Freedom), Lichtschlag Medien, 2012, p. 62) described the politicians’ need to be constantly “doing something” in his unique style: “The political class has to justify its reason for existing by doing something. But because it makes everything that it touches much worse, it is forced to make changes all the time; that means that it has to do something because it has already done something. It would not have to do anything if it had not already done something. If we only knew what to do to stop it from doing things.” One cannot describe politics and politicians more accurately than that. Our politicians act as if they can reshape the social and economic world to be just the way they want it. And because of their permanent need to act and their continual interference in the economy, they create the impression that they are actually capable of doing that. This is egomania. We want to destroy this mindset, this irrational belief, once and for all. Thorsten Polleit hit the nail on the head in Der Hauptstadtbrief (Letter from Berlin), Issue 10/2013): “What drives the supporters of interventionism is the opinion that through government interventions results can be achieved that are better than when the free market reigns. They are of the opinion that interventionism is a possible middle way between the capitalist (free market) system and socialism (collective ownership of the means of production). The interventionists thus believe that through interventionism, the ‘good sides’ of capitalism and socialism can be made use of while the bad sides can be excluded.” To put it very simply, the belief is: So we want some capitalism, because we are all a bit greedy and capitalism does in fact deliver the goods. But because we are also nice and socially minded people, not too much of it. Seriously? Can that work? No! Unfortunately, being “a little pregnant” is not possible. And the politicians have created a successful business model for this: We will let the market economy first do something, but as soon as we don’t get the outcome we desire, we call that “market failure” and government steps in. To understand the results of interventionism, let’s return to our now familiar city. We haven’t been there for a while and should have a look ... In the meantime, things have gone downhill in our city. About half of the dairy cows in the area have died from some disease. The result: milk is very scarce and the price has risen sharply. People complain about the high price of milk to the king, saying that he should intervene and do something. The king, of course, wants the people to like him, and he issues a proclamation: the price of a gallon of milk cannot exceed one-tenth of a gold dollar (which is what the currency is called now). By doing this he is setting a maximum price below the market price. All his subjects are happy with this decree, except for the farmers. For many of them, milk production at the price set by the king is unprofitable. Although most farmers have lost about half of their herd of cows and half as many cows only eat half as much, the farmers’ fixed costs have not been reduced by half. (That is why they are called “fixed” costs.) Some dairy farmers therefore decide to get out of the farming business. They slaughter most of their animals except what is needed for their own use, and only produce milk for their own consumption. The milk supply falls further. Only a few farmers who are very efficient in milk production remain in business. But of course the milk they produce is no longer sufficient to supply all the people. In order to reduce demand, the king’s next proclamation will therefore be: From now on, milk consumption will be limited to one pint per person per day. What happens next is protest marches toward the king’s castle. The people are enraged and demand that their sovereign do something! And he acts by turning the screws of interventionism even tighter. The king prohibits all further slaughter of cows, as well as the use of cows for the farmers’ own consumption of milk or meat. Anyone who has a cow must by law use it for milk production, and must sell the entire production at the imposed maximum price or less. This move brings with it a short-term relief. More milk flows into the stores. But for the farmers, the situation just became worse. They are practically forced into supplying milk at a loss. Their production costs in the form of wages, energy, agricultural equipment leases, and so on, exceed the permitted legal sales price for the milk. The result: cows that die of illness or old age are not replaced. Cow breeders get out of the business. It is even rumored that individual farmers are poisoning their own animals to avoid further losses. Milk production falls even further. This is the opposite of what the king wanted to achieve with his interventions! But he does not give up. Next, he regulates the input prices of the farmers and sets an upper limit for what they have to pay for agricultural wages, equipment leases, and energy. With their costs reduced by decree, it is again profitable for the farmers to produce milk. The shelves fill up again. The king is satisfied with his interventionist measures, believing that they have taken care of the problems — and then he hears the latest news. The farmers can’t get anyone to work for them anymore. Agricultural workers are leaving in droves to find work elsewhere — in sectors where the wages have not been artificially lowered. Agricultural equipment is no longer being produced. Fields are left fallow. The king gets mad and decides to act again. He regulates the wages in other sectors, as well as the input prices of the equipment manufacturing industry, and orders that the fields be planted. Slowly but surely, it has gotten to the point where the king sets all the prices. The spiral of interventions has come to the last thread of the screw. Welcome to socialism! Of course, from the very beginning, the king could have intervened in milk production and could have let the bureaucrats determine the production, distribution, and prices of milk. Or put more simply: he could have nationalized milk production from the outset — with the same result. Anyone who has lived in communist East Germany, Cuba, or the Soviet Union can tell you how well the supply of consumer goods works under communism. If you want to experience socialism yourself, go spend your next vacation in North Korea. There, you can see how socialism really works — or more precisely, how it does not work. But why doesn’t socialism work? The answer is simple: In a socialist system, there is no private property. The state owns all property. Or “the people” own it, as these states like to claim, because it sounds better. The production of goods is not determined by consumer demand. State bureaucrats determine what should be produced. They decide what goods should be manufactured and in what quantities, and who will receive them. Ludwig von Mises, in his book Socialism: An Economic and Sociological Analysisfrom 1922 demonstrated that socialism cannot work. He proved that economic calculation is impossible under socialism. Basic bookkeeping and accounting allow a business owner to know if he has made profits or losses. This is enormously important in a market economy. Profits show that the factors of production have been combined in a way that increases value: the selling price of the product is above the expenses required to obtain the resources needed to manufacture it. On the other hand, losses show that resources were wasted: we would have been better off if they had been used to produce something else. In socialism there is public or common ownership of the factors of production: raw materials, machines, and factories are all owned by the state. For this reason, there are no exchanges of goods and services and thus no market prices for raw materials, machines, and factories. And without market prices, economic calculation cannot take place. So people don’t know if they have made a profit or a loss. They cannot even calculate the cheapest way to manufacture something. Should the conductor used in computer chips be of iron, steel, copper, silver, gold, or silicon? The chip would be just as fast. But the socialist planner is in the dark: without a market price, the decision will be arbitrary and based on the planner’s whim. Back to our city. Let’s rewind and go back in time to the moment when the people complain to the king about the high milk prices. This time, the king responds differently. He calls in a consultant, one who understands economics. He has some uncomfortable suggestions for his new client: he advises the king NOT to intervene and NOT to set a maximum price for milk. The king at first is skeptical and asks himself: What do I need a consultant for, if all he can tell me is to do nothing? But the consultant explains his ideas to the king in detail, and he is convincing. And the king does … nothing. The king doesn’t need to do anything, because the price of milk rises fast as a result of the deaths of the sick cows — and that is normal. After all, the high price of milk tells the market participants that milk is very scarce relative to demand at the moment. The profits of the dairy farmers rise. For those prone to envy, that might be very painful at first. “We have to buy your expensive milk and you are filling your pockets with cash,” many will say. But will this condition last? Of course not. What will happen? Some of the dairy farmers will earn more money and they buy additional dairy cows. Other farmers, who were not engaged in milk production at all, have noticed the higher milk prices and see an opportunity to make money in that field, and so they also get into milk production. Cattle breeders are flooded with orders and they develop more efficient ways to breed cows. Cows that were destined to be slaughtered are now put into milk production instead. The current technique used for production of milk is not adequate to handle the increased quantity of milk needed; it takes too long and some of the milk spoils before it can get to the market. An inventive person, who sees the possibility of making some money, creates a pump that speeds up milk production and reduces waste during the process. Consumers also have to take into account the higher price of milk. They reduce their milk consumption and look for milk substitutes. The next door neighbor’s kitten no longer gets dairy milk that is now too expensive, but water or goat’s milk. You can imagine how this story ends. After more dairy cows fill the milking stalls on the farms and additional milk producers enter the market, the quantity of milk rises. At the same time, consumers have become thriftier and are using substitutes for milk where possible. So supply is up, and demand is down. As a result, the price of milk falls. As we have seen, people in a free market solved the problem all by themselves, with entrepreneurial foresight and creativity. Fully without coercion, without police, military, judges, or prisons. No state intervention was required. In contrast, the original interventions by the king were counterproductive, as we saw. In a competitive free market, enterprises compete in guiding capital and resources to where they are most urgently needed. If the entrepreneurs are right, they earn profits. If they are wrong, they suffer losses. If they are really right, they earn high profits. If very wrong, immense losses. Losses are a sign that capital and resources have been wasted. And this not only makes the entrepreneur poorer, but also society, and we all suffer. Isn’t it strange that entrepreneurs are not criticized by politicians and media commentators for the losses they incur, but for profits that are “too high.” From the consumers’ point of view, the opposite should be the case. The higher the profit, the better. Higher profits mean that scarce resources have been used to meet the needs of people. And that is what we care about, right? In the market economy, the entrepreneur or business owner is merely the man at the helm, the taker of orders. The man at the helm tries to estimate the future commands of the “captain.” And the “captain” is the consumer. The “captain” — and we are all the “captain” — determines what things will be produced, and how they are manufactured, by simply making choices in the marketplace to purchase certain goods, and to pass other goods by. An uncountable number of economically relevant decisions are made by millions of people every day in the country you live in. This is the market, which draws criticism from all sides. And politicians want to control this market with interventions. This is the fatal conceit, as Friedrich August von Hayek once called it. We refer to it as megalomania. If a government or an agency of the state intervenes in the market, an existing problem will perhaps be solved — for the moment. But another will be created by the intervention, as we saw in the milk problem. Due to the price ceiling, some producers dropped out of the market and the supply of milk shrank. The king certainly did not intend for that to happen! Thus, each intervention must bring with it the next one, until in the end, everything is regulated. The market economy is thus increasingly burdened and robbed of its power. What led to the downfall of the Roman Empire? In school, you were probably told that an increasingly decadent Rome was overrun by barbarian tribes. But that was not the real reason for the fall of Rome, as Ludwig von Mises shows in his book Human Action. Interventionism led to Rome’s downfall. Or more precisely, the welfare state, which caused a spiral of interventions. Bad money also played an important role. What? You have never heard this? But it is true. The barbarians had been pressing against the boundaries of Rome for centuries. A powerful, prospering Roman Empire found it easy to push them back — until the heavy burdens of the welfare state destroyed Roman society. The barbarians were then able to invade and occupy the weakened ruins of the former strong empire. The downfall began when emperors found they needed to gain favor with the people through the strategy of panem et circenses — bread and circuses. Further attempts to gain favor with the masses was to nationalize the grain trade, the so-called annona. The emperor distributed grain at highly subsidized prices, or even at times for free. More and more people, the so-called proles (from which we have the term proletariat) lived off the largesse of the state. They became dependent on the annona. Today we say that they lived on welfare. To keep the masses quiet, gladiatorial fights were put on. In short, the emperors created a welfare state with its unavoidable and ever-rising costs. But how to defray those costs? Without raising fees and taxes so high as to provoke revolts? The emperors had a very clever idea. You probably already guessed it: They manipulated the monetary system. More precisely, they reduced the quality of the coins, by smelting down old coins made of precious metals and reminting them after adding cheaper base metals like copper. They were thus able to expand the available number of coins, and in this way they were able to pay their expenses. A redistribution in favor of the state occurred, with the state as the first user of the new inferior money, at the expense of later recipients. As a result of this inflationary policy, prices rose. The proletariat became restive. The emperors then decreed maximum prices. The price ceilings led many farmers to conclude that producing food was no longer profitable. Farmers throughout Italy, who had up to that time produced food for the market and for the population of Rome, withdrew from exchange. Some limited themselves to production for their own use. Others moved from the farm to the city. Why produce grain at a loss when food was practically free in Rome? The proletariat and the city of Rome expanded fast. And with it the costs of the welfare state. The division of labor which had been so well developed up until then, the intense exchange between the agrarian population and the cities across the entire Mediterranean, collapsed. Instead of productive specialization and exchange, inefficient autonomous production now reigned. The welfare state, inflation, and interventionism dealt a death blow to the market economy. Rome was no longer able to pay for its legions of soldiers. The barbarians invaded and occupied the remains of the once flourishing empire, which finally fell in the 5th century A.D. Instead of a highly specialized division of labor and a market economy, there was now feudalism. A long and painful economic decline set in. It is not a law of nature that civilization always advances and the living standard always improves. Far from it! Without the right legal, economic, and social conditions, such as private property, individual freedom and sound money, things can reverse and go downhill. Peter Temin in his book The Roman Market Economy estimated that the average per-capita income fell greatly with the fall of the Roman Empire, permanently or at least for a long time. According to Temin, the standard of living enjoyed by the ancient Romans was only experienced again at the start of the modern era, around the year 1700. They were in a recession for a thousand years! For a thousand years people were poorer than the Romans had been in the ancient era, thanks to the welfare state, financed by inflation, and interventionism. Put down the book for a moment and think. Where would we be today if this thousand-year break had not occurred? What if people in classical times had just continued with their capital accumulation, division of labor and their economic and technical advances? It took 200 years from the start of the Industrial Revolution in the 18th century to the first moon landing. Just consider it with an open mind. Without the more than a thousand lost years, caused by interventionism and inflation, we might have been on the moon in the year 700 A.D. Or maybe in the year 1000. And where would that put us today? That is of course science fiction. We can only imagine what it would have been like. We would also have to imagine a world with good money. We have no solid comparison with our current situation. We can only guess how robust, dynamic, and wealthy our current civilization would be today if governments had not destroyed the gold standard and replaced it with a paper money system that allows them to finance bloated welfare states. We can only imagine how vibrant our civilization would be without today’s tangle of regulations and taxes. The people of communist East Germany had a comparison. They just had to look over the Berlin Wall to see the West’s wealth of goods. They saw, were shocked and were appalled. They protested against their system. The Berlin Wall fell. Today no one is protesting, because today we have no parallel society that we can look to that would show us how good things could be without paper money, welfare states, and bad governments. There is simply no way to know. Our impoverishment today is not yet complete. Living standards are not falling. We are only poor compared to a world with sound money and without state intervention. If we could actually see this hypothetical world, as was the case for the people of communist East Germany, then people would be at the barricades; they would rise up and storm the central banks and the parliaments. Even if our standard of living is not falling in absolute terms, the parallels between our economic situation today and the fall of the Roman Empire are striking and worrisome. Bread and circuses (for example election campaigns) are today incredibly expensive, and can barely be financed. Bad money and inflation are slowly destroying our standard of living. And interventionism is expanding at a rapid pace. There is hardly any area of life in which the state and government do not intervene. People are prevented from acting the way they would want to by interventions, regulations, laws and prohibitions. For example, an entrepreneur will abstain from an investment that would have created jobs if the project is no longer seen as profitable because of an increase in the legal minimum wage. Those jobs are not created. But no one talks about those uncreated jobs, because they have not been created, and are not visible. Another important topic in the discussion of intervention in the market is the minimum wage, which was just introduced in Germany and has existed in the U.S. since 1938. The examples above have shown how different state interventions affect one another in such a way that the average person does not see the relationships, much less understand them. Please recall Chapters 3 and 5. There we described in detail how the expansion of the money supply has a tendency to lead to income and wealth being redistributed from the bottom to the top income classes. The expansion of the money supply and the manipulation of the interest rate downward are nothing but interference with money, nothing other than intervention. (Note that the nationalization of the monetary system is itself an intervention.) This intervention makes some poorer and some richer. As a tendency, price increases result in the lower and middle classes becoming poorer, and the rich — with their direct and faster access to the new money — become richer. Over time, the lower income classes are able to buy less and less, because the purchasing power of their income falls due to inflation. It is at this point that politicians, union leaders, and other well-meaning people take to the stage and speak for those whose wages are no longer sufficient to pay for their living expenses, and demand that a minimum wage be set by the state. Look at how these people speak into the microphones and how they always claim to know exactly what needs to be done: We have to… “Have to” seems so harmless. But “have to” means that state coercion, physical violence, or the threat of force is needed to solve the problem. “Have to” means — ultimately — police and prison for those who do not obey. Why not just try voluntary agreement and contractual cooperation? Why always resort to coercion and force? Can it really be that not one of these self-proclaimed experts knows that the inflation they are complaining about has been caused by government interventions in the first place? We ask in all honesty: Is this possible? It has to make one distrustful when topics such as money creation out of thin air and artificially low interest rates are totally ignored in all the discussions about the causes of our problems. In any case, all the “experts” are in agreement: We have to do something! The state has to see to it that people can once again make a living from their labor. Initial government interventions in the form of monetary expansion and low interest rate policiesare inevitably followed by the next market intervention: a minimum wage law. But this intervention also has consequences that no one wants: specifically, unemployment. You doubt that? Note, if the minimum wage is higher than the market wage, the demand for workers will automatically fall. Economically, a minimum wage is also called a minimum price: the opposite of a maximum price, as was the case with milk in our city. It represents a lower price limit. If farmers are guaranteed a minimum price of two gold dollars per gallon from the state, then the result will be huge unsellable surpluses — oceans of excess milk. Farmers produce like crazy and at the same time, the demand for milk falls. The same happens with a minimum wage. More and more people try to enter the labor market or to work longer hours, whereas they could have focused on their children or cultural pursuits, education, and other leisure activities. At the same time, demand for labor from potential employers falls. The result: legions of unemployed people. And if a minimum wage of $10 per hour is good, why not $100 or $1,000? What would happen if a minimum wage of $10,000 per hour were set? Correct! Mass unemployment. But normally minimum wages are much more moderate. And because only those people are excluded from the labor market whose productivity is under the minimum wage, it only affects a few. But these are exactly those people — people without a lot of qualifications and with a lower income — who were intended to be helped by those advocating a minimum wage. If the legal minimum wage is followed by unemployment, you will not have to wait long before politicians focus on the next intervention: education and skills training for the unemployed, which will have to be paid for somehow. Politicians will now go to the media with the message: Equality of opportunity must be achieved! We have to start with pre-school education. We need more public kindergartens and day care centers. So many parents can no longer afford to educate their children(nor be trusted to do so),because their level of education is low(that is not spoken out loud, however), and some because they just can’t do it for lack of time. Family life is increasingly brought under state influence. We already dealt with this topic in detail in the previous chapter. Yet another intervention is the government promoted “energy switch” (the switch away from nuclear power to “green” energy) imposed in Germany and elsewhere; it is an example par excellence of state interventionism. You can directly observe the results of state intervention in the energy supply sector on your energy bill if you live in Germany. It has nothing to do with a market economy anymore. Perhaps you can still afford to subsidize this government nonsense with your own income, if you are rich enough. The single widow living alone and people living on low incomes certainly cannot do so. In neighboring Austria, they are rolling on the floor laughing at the Germans. Especially when the sun is shining and there is constant wind in Germany and the momentary market price of energy is very low. Then the Austrians buy German energy — which was generated at a high cost — for a song, and use it to pump water into their mountain reservoirs. Later they use the stored water to generate cheap hydro-electric power, which they can sell back to Germany at a higher price! One intervention follows another. Attempts are made to soften the effects of one state intervention by using further state interventions. One effect is, for example, that a single widow in Wanne-Eickel (a provincial German city) can no longer pay her energy costs, because the energy price she pays also has to pay for the huge solar wind-farm in far-off Bavaria. But thank God there is the “energy-savings check” sent to her from Caritas, a charity, and from energy agencies and climate change agencies. Grandma is very happy about that, because otherwise she might have to sit in the dark. The catch is that the process is subsidized by the German Federal Environmental Ministry. The Internet site of an energy-saving initiative in Germany states what would otherwise happen to many people in Germany without this assistance: “The energy-saving check is an assistance that helps people help themselves and is intended to prevent low-income people from being left in the dark without electricity. Upon request, authorized households are visited by the energy-saving helpers, who will first determine energy and water consumption. Then free energy-saving devices specific to each household will be installed, and tips will be given on how to use them and how to be energy-efficient … The energy-saving helpers will install free energy-saving lamps, water tap installations, humidifiers, TV switches and switchable power strips.” This sounds like Christmas! Please don’t misunderstand us. We are not criticizing the “energy-saving helpers.” They no doubt do a lot of good. And also we don’t intend to accuse the Bavarian large-scale farmers with their huge photovoltaic installations of being bad. They all act rationally. But state subsidies are flowing there. Your money is being spent there if you live in Germany. Money that the state takes from you coercively. Money that you could have used for your own purposes. Over time, all that adds up. You could have used that money to buy your wife a nice gift, or to save money for your children’s education. One way or another, state interventions lead to capital and resources not being used where they are needed most. For that to happen it is necessary that the free market, which discovers where these resources are most urgently demanded, is not distorted by interventions. When someone writes and speaks as we do, you have to watch out that you are not pilloried because “higher” goals are considered more important, “higher” goals as defined by our all-knowing politicians along with others who represent labor unions and special interest groups. Ludwig von Mises saw it that way. In 1944, in his book Bureaucracy, he wrote: “But ours is an age of a general attack on the profit motive. Public opinion condemns it as highly immoral and extremely detrimental to the commonweal. Political parties and governments are anxious to remove it and to put in its place what they call the ‘service’ point of view and what is in fact bureaucratic management.” Through ever greater state interventions in economic life, the profit motive of market participants is permanently distorted. People act differently than they would without state interference. In the end, everything is like a thick tangled web — overgrown and suffocating. So interwoven that the individual threads, or initial interventions, are no longer recognizable. The average person is no longer able to discern what has happened and the so-called experts are clueless. The state can do what they wish. The free market is buried under an interventionist avalanche. The experts, by the way, are mostly economists. In actuality, universities breed “experts” who have studied macroeconomics and who favor intervention. Those students have learned that uncontrolled markets are unpredictable and do not function in an orderly fashion, and why the state needs to intervene to help them out. Those “experts” find employment at government agencies and enterprises that then have to deal with the regulations. For example, students who specialize in monetary theory have good chances of getting a job at the central bank. Indeed, they will have learned that a paper money system is advantageous, and how to “fine-tune” the economy using the money supply and interest rate policy. And to reiterate: without state money and other interventions by the state, these economists would not be needed in the first place! It is thus not a surprise that most economists are in favor of state intervention, and that they accept the central bank and state money as if these institutions were ordained by God. Their jobs depend on it! If I eat the king’s bread, I sing the king’s song, as the saying goes. (There are apparently exceptions, as you have probably already noticed). But back to the avalanche of interventionism. The interference of the state in the monetary system is just the beginning. Soviet politician and revolutionary leader Vladimir Lenin (1870–1924) was once reported to have said: The best way to destroy the capitalist system is to destroy the currency. Lenin would have loved our current economic situation. René Scheu, the publisher of the libertarian-oriented magazine Schweizer Monat(The Swiss Monthly) has described our current environment as “semi-socialism.” If a way is not found back to a free market economy and we continue down the path of more state interference and management, the road will end with total socialism. We have already seen how our king could not stop once he began controlling the price of milk. The alternative would have been to give up all price controls and to allow the market to solve the problem. When he did not do that, logically he had to take further steps. In the end, the king needed to monitor that the farmers did not evade his price controls. The people will perhaps attempt to obtain the much needed milk by paying higher prices. A black market will result. And how will the king prevent a black market? He will threaten people with steep penalties, and enforce them when perpetrators are caught. Maybe he will spy on his own people to uncover black marketeers of milk and prosecute them. Does that sound familiar? The East German communist state had such a system until 1989. Of course, the blame would be put on others, for example those farmers who turn to the black market. The black market in East Germany was the solution to the problem of scarcity and a way to evade the impoverishing regulations. A black market is not a problem, but rather the market solution to the problems created by government! Without functioning black markets in Eastern Europe, socialism and communism would have collapsed much sooner. Now please transfer this idea to the current financial crisis. Who do our politicians blame for these crises? Exactly. The “greedy speculators” and the bankers. In a 2008 interview in the German magazine Stern, German President Horst Köhler said that the financial markets have turned into a monster. This statement is even more notable considering that Köhler was the managing director of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in 2004, before his election as German president in 2004. He should thus know the real causes of the crisis — the paper money, the central banks, and the fractional reserve banking system. But the blame is put on others. In doing so, it is easy to justify additional rules and regulations and to draw attention away from failed policies. The failures may be turned into an opportunity to introduce new taxes, for example a financial transaction tax: As they put it, one must make those who caused the crisis participate in its costs. Politicians make calculated use of envy and direct people’s anger and rage in a focused way at entrepreneurs and the rich. Consider for a moment in how many areas free price formation is not allowed today. Interest rates are manipulated by the central banks, a minimum level is set for wages, and the energy prices are driven up due to the state-ordered “energy switch” to green energy (in Germany). Another important area is the healthcare system, which is saturated by state regimentation and price setting. In Germany, all the insurance providers are forced to bill the same monthly fee, which eliminates competition. In the U.S., with Obamacare the government is beginning a takeover of the medical insurance. Although the individual national governments in Europe are the true villains in this tale, the bureaucrats of the European Union are eagerly joining the party, overruling national bureaucrats and imposing additional regulations and guidelines over all the citizens of Europe. The ban on traditional lightbulbs is just the most trivial example! More and more, palpable pressure is put on the critics of increasing state influence. Most of all, critics of the EU are defamed and depicted as “anti-European.” Yet it was competition and freedom that made Europe great, and not centralism and state dirigisme (strong state control of investments). The real Europeans are those who fight the EU Moloch. The “anti-Europeans” sit in Brussels, at the EU headquarters. Summary: State interference in economic life not only distorts the free interplay between market participants, it also leads to more and more interventions and thus to a ballooning of state power. Either earlier interventions must be cancelled, or new problems that were created have to be corrected with further meddling. An interventionist spiral is set in motion which further limits people’s freedom. At the end of this path stands full totalitarian socialism. But ultimately socialism cannot work, because there is no price formation and thus no economic calculation is possible. Under socialism, capital and resources are wasted. Society becomes poorer. Maintaining a socialist system is only possible through more and more state surveillance and coercion. The most pernicious of all interventions is the nationalization of money and with it the monopolization of money creation. This intervention is the trigger for numerous other interventions. The fall of the Roman Empire shows where the manipulation of money — coupled with an interventionist spiral — leads.
