# How It Will All End

## Source Metadata

- Chapter number: 9
- TOC index: 15
- Part: main
- EPUB src: text/part0014.html
- Extraction mode: single-source

## Extracted Text

8. How it will all end “What the people already ate, they will miss for decades when they are hungry.” - Roland Baader As you can no doubt see, we are in big trouble. We won’t get out of it without some painful steps. The cancer of state money has already spread throughout the body of the economy, doing extensive damage. For some time now, we have been living in a period of increasing impoverishment in relation to where we could have been without the interference of the state in our lives and the economy. The majority of people are clueless. But thanks to this book you are no longer one of them. You have been awakened from your fog of ignorance! Sometimes it is easier to live in ignorance. But it is too late for that now. And look on the positive side: you now know what is happening and can react appropriately. The paper money system has done great damage to society. It has enabled the financing of huge “unfair states” and contributed to the decline of traditional institutions such as the family. Society has become much more materialistic. People plan short term and take on debt. The “de-socialization” caused by ever more burdensome governments pumped up on the drug of paper money is becoming increasingly worrisome. In the end, our individual liberty is overrun by the monetary printing press. The social redistribution results of the paper money system make states, banks, large enterprises, and the super-rich richer, but the poor and middle class poorer. A monetary divide is increasingly evident in society. Social conflicts are increasing and the real economy is buckling under the burden of the financial industry cartel. One thing has to be made clear: misallocation caused by money production has already done enormous damage to real wealth. We just don’t see it yet! Unfortunately we do not have a society to compare it to in which this waste did not occur. State expenditures for welfare programs at home and military interventions abroad have caused increasing state debt and increasing budget deficits in the western world. This debt will never be able to be repaid, in real terms. The welfare state is, by the way, the greatest malinvestment of them all. It does not satisfy the needs of people cooperating freely among one another and would end quickly if it were not permanently subsidized by the money monopoly and tax money collected by coercion. The cycles of artificial booms and recessions caused by the privileged banking system bring immense suffering to people. The financial crisis of 2008–2009 revealed the enormous amount of resources that disappeared into the chasm of the money system. Forever. Was it really so bad, you think? Certainly you are overstating what happened! The 2008 bailout orgy was without historical precedent. Banks, businesses, and even governments were rescued. Without pain, right? But have you noticed something strange? Did you lose your job or your savings? Were your taxes brutally increased in the past few years? Did your tax burden double? Probably not. How is the ongoing bailout financed? You already know: by new debt, by new money. This is what is so insidious about the state money system: it makes it possible to hide the true costs and losses which the system itself creates. It lulls people into a false sense of security. This false sense of security has been taken away from you. We warned you in the introduction to this book that unpleasant realities awaited you. The big collapse did not happen in 2008. After the collapse of Lehman Brothers and the subsequent financial crisis, only part of the malinvestments were liquidated. Enterprises such as the troubled auto manufacturers and mortgage banks were rescued by the state; either by direct capital injections or indirectly through subsidies and state orders for goods and services. Bad private investments were turned into bad public debt — the process silent and lubricated with new money. This is because the state debt was financed indirectly with new money production. Central banks created new money with which the (commercial) banks and other economic “agents” then bought government bonds. But it was not just the real economy that got into trouble. The bursting of the real estate bubble caused extreme losses for the banks. But these losses were also only partly recognized, and banks were saved all over the world by their respective national governments. As a result, the bad debt was transferred from the banks to their governments, but this does not mean that these debts have disappeared. Or do you believe that a hot potato just disappears when it is handed off? Someone has it. Ultimately it is all of us who have it, as will become obvious sooner or later. In the meantime, additional bad state debt has been added: for example through the increase in “social expenditures” in the form of support for the unemployed and through numerous economic programs meant to jump-start the economy. State debt since 2008 has exploded — and hovers over us like the Sword of Damocles. In other words: The losses stemming from malinvestments were to a large part just shifted to the nation-states and to the balance sheets of the central banks. Neither the original investors nor the bank shareholders nor the bank creditors nor the holders of government bonds have yet written off the losses. The bad debt just keeps piling up in the form of national debt. But shifting around bad debts does not bring back lost wealth. The debts remain. When and how do you think the debt will catch up to us? To pursue this question, let’s return one last time to our imaginary city. For the sake of simplicity, let’s assume that there are only two generations. The first is represented by the fisherman. He has been working hard for decades and saves for his retirement. He uses his old boat for his work. As dilapidated as it is, he will mothball it as soon as he goes into retirement. The fisherman invests his savings in bonds which are issued by a young captain, who represents the younger generation in our story. The young captain invests the fisherman’s money (from the bonds) in a project that has a lot of promise. He starts building a new modern fishing boat. The captain wants the vessel to be larger and more efficient than the fisherman’s dilapidated old boat. The captain will be able to catch enough fish to feed both of them with the new boat, when the fisherman is retired. The captain will then easily be able to repay the loan and the fisherman can enjoy his retirement. Once the fisherman retires, he wants to use his savings. He wants to sell his bonds over time to buy the goods (fish) produced by the captain. But his plan will not work if the captain wasted his capital on malinvestments. If the capital was wasted, the bonds represent bad debt. The captain will find it impossible to repay the real value of the debt. He is not able to catch enough fish to feed both himself and the retired fisherman. Why the captain cannot pay is ultimately not important. Maybe he is a con man and didn’t even build the boat, but just used the fisherman’s savings for his own consumption. Just as today the state gives tax money to welfare recipients who then just consume the funds. Or as today, with the state not investing contributions to the public pension system, but rather putting them into a pay-as-you-go system and funneling it to retirees — who then for the most part consume it. The state pension system (Social Security in the U.S.) is dangerous because it simulates a replacement for savings. I don’t have to save, I pay my retirement contributions, is what many think. But nothing is saved, it is simply transferred to others and to a large extent consumed. The pensions of the retirees (returns on their savings) are instead paid out of the contributions of wage earners — those currently working. This acts like a gigantic chain letter system, or pyramid scheme — just like the scam perpetrated by financial criminal Bernie Madoff. Madoff enticed many investors with enormous returns. And he used the money of the most recent investors to pay the older ones high returns, right up until the moment when his fraud was exposed. And it ended the way every pyramid scheme ends — with great losses suffered by most of the victims. But the fisherman’s money can be wasted in other ways. The captain can be highly decent and honorable, but the projects financed with the fisherman’s capital could still fail — think of the malinvestments of the financial crisis in the real estate sector, for example. Let’s imagine that the boat was poorly built and sunk (malinvestment such as the real estate bubble) or that the captain never even built the boat, because he preferred to throw parties (malinvestment such as the welfare state). The assets that the fisherman thinks he owns are no longer there. The fisherman lived the entire time under the illusion that he was rich. He still owns those bonds, after all! Now let’s imagine that the king has introduced paper money and a central bank. To rescue the situation, the king buys out the captain’s failed business (along with the sunken boat). This prevents a bankruptcy, which would have revealed the losses. Just as enterprises were bailed out by the government during the recent financial crisis! The king could also choose to bail out the captain not by buying the business, but by making additional funds available, so that the captain can continue to operate his failing business. The king obtains the money by taking on debt himself — in other words issuing debt (bonds) and having the central bank buy up the bonds (just as central banks today buy up government debt). The king is not dumb, after all. The captain could then pay the fisherman with freshly printed money, due to the intervention of the king. As an alternative, the central bank could print money and directly buy up the fisherman’s bonds. Thus the bad investments (in the form of bonds) end up on the central bank’s balance sheets, or in the king’s coffers. The fisherman could thus continue to live under the illusion that he is rich because he owns state debt, paper money, or bonds of a nationalized or state-subsidized firm. The fisherman’s situation is comparable to ours today: many people feel rich and secure, because — on paper — they have assets saved, because they own government bonds, bank deposits, or bond funds. Or because they have a life insurance policy or retirement insurance (banks, mutual funds, and life insurance companies are heavily invested in government debt). At any rate, the wealth destruction (the sinking of the boat, or money wasted on a partying lifestyle), in other words, the malinvestment, cannot be undone. In the end, the fisherman will not be able to eat the bonds, the paper money, or the financial claims that he owns. There is simply nothing there to back them up. In our example, given the lack of a boat no one is catching fish today in our imaginary city, so the available fish will not be sufficient to feed both the fisherman (the older generation) and the captain (the younger generation). And what will the fisherman do then? It is the same for people today. Many believe that they have wealth that in reality does not exist. The assets were squandered directly or indirectly through malinvestments made by governments. Governments squandered the money in state welfare projects and on promises they cannot keep through the state pension systems; they bailed out unhealthy and failing companies by creating artificial markets, they granted subsidies and capital injections. Government debts exploded. Many people believe that paper assets that they own in the form of government bonds (debt), mutual funds, insurance policies, bank accounts, and other claims will assure them of a comfortable retirement. But in retirement, they will only be able to consume that which they have saved in the form of real goods, and — more importantly — what is produced in the real economy. But the actual productive capacity of the economy is seriously damaged and diminished due to government intervention. Today’s paper assets are covered by a lot of hot air. The continual shifting of bad debt to governments and central banks cannot undo the destruction of wealth. The day of reckoning will come sooner or later. Savers and retirees will notice at some point that the real value of their assets is lower than they had thought it would be. How this day of reckoning comes is up in the air. We can only hope that growth through technological innovation, capital accumulation, and an increasing division of labor at home and in other parts of the world will help to soften the eventual blow. That we have arrived at this point cannot now be changed. But was the situation really unavoidable? Did it have to be this way? If you have read this far, you will know the answer: once we bet on the wrong horse, the catastrophe became unavoidable. The reason can be found in the system itself. The pure paper money system that we have lived under for over 40 years encourages the taking on of too much debt, and carries with it the seeds of its own destruction. In a coercive fiat monetary system, money can be created out of thin air on a computer. The temptation to take advantage of this power is almost irresistible. In a paper money system, the money supply and prices have a tendency to continually rise. Saving cash to acquire assets is not advisable in such a system. It is much smarter to go into debt to acquire assets such as real estate and to pay back the debt later with money that by then will be worth less, or even worthless. Those economic agents who hope to be bailed out through the production of new money have a particularly strong incentive to take on a large amount of debt. Large organizations, primarily banks, and governments can hope to be too big to fail. As if that were not enough, the fractional banking system causes more and more booms and busts. There is no complete liquidation in the bust phase. On the contrary, new money is produced in order to slow down the adjustment process or to prevent it completely. The imbalances slowly accumulate. And then we start from a place of ever higher levels of bad debt, and embark on a new cycle. The same system has been in place for the past 40 years. During crises, the interest rates are lowered and over-indebted economic actors are bailed out with new money. A paper money system thus resembles a snowball that is let go on the top of a mountain and rolls downhill, becoming bigger and bigger and causing additional masses of snow to be dislodged. The incentive to use the money monopoly for one’s own enrichment is enormously seductive. And that makes it attractive to take on further debt. In the crisis, the debtors are then bailed out with the creation of more money and by the lowering of interest rates. The incentive towards a debt-based economy is further strengthened. The debt avalanche grows and grows and races faster and faster toward its ultimate destination. But the end of the road appears to be slowly coming into view. Interest rates are near zero. They cannot sink much further. State debt in most industrial nations is now at a level never seen before, during peacetime or war. Is that the economic sustainability promised on all sides? Government deficits remain high. The unwillingness of people to radically reform the welfare state is simply too great. People are already addicted to the drug of cheap money. Banks and other financial institutions are sitting on an enormous mountain of public debt. At the same time, real and substantial economic growth is nowhere to be seen — even if that is the last shred of hope that our politicians hang on to. The elites in politics and the banking sector are stuck in a trap of their own making. The central banks cannot allow the bankruptcy of large-scale debtors, because that could bring down the entire banking system. A government that defaults could trigger the immediate bankruptcy of the whole banking system. Raising the interest rates to a realistic level or selling the assets bought by the central banks would put at extreme risk the solvency of the banking sector, and highly-indebted enterprises, and entire governments. Not to mention over-indebted consumers … To avoid that kind of bankruptcy, the central bank only has one option: to keep pedaling, as it were. Keeping the pedal to the metal. Producing more money to rescue debtors. But that is like throwing gasoline on a fire, because the mountain of debt and the attendant problems then continue to grow. It even appears that printing less money — in other words merely slowing down the money printing — (they call this “tapering”) could cause substantial problems and a rash of bankruptcies for market participants. Could there be a reduction of debt within this paper money system? In principle, yes. But a massive reduction of state expenditures for the purpose of paying down debt is pretty unlikely given the incentives for politicians in a democracy. It will instead be necessary to print more and more money so that states, banks, and over-indebted market participants do not get into trouble. Continued irresponsible behavior and a new, larger crisis are thus foreordained. This road leads ultimately to hyperinflation, which totally devalues all debt. It is one form of the unavoidable declaration of bankruptcy. Debtors win and creditors lose. The “paper wealth” that many built up over their entire lives will be insufficient to support the standard of living that they have imagined for themselves. Will money just continue to be printed, and will the interest rates be stuck at zero until people totally lose their trust in paper money currencies? Will the currency collapse be inevitable, or will there be an alternative to hyperinflation? And how will the losses suffered by people play out? Let’s consider this together. Today, the central banks are feeling intense pressure to inflate the money supply. Why? Because many economic actors that the central bank is very fond of, such as the state, whom the central bank has to thank for its position, and the banks, are over-indebted. But if that over-indebtedness can be reduced, then the pressure on the central banks to “do something” is greatly reduced. How could the debt load of the economy be reduced? There are many ways to reduce debt. In each case, hidden losses are revealed, but in different ways. And who ultimately bears the losses may differ as well. At one time, states could improve their financial positions just by not keeping the promises that they made. States could massively cut public pensions, social wealth transfers and unemployment insurance to pay down their deficits and to pay back their debts. Many of the state’s promises of security that people relied on would turn out to be worthless. In addition, states could simply stop paying back their debts by declaring bankruptcy. This would lead to losses at the banks and insurance companies, which have invested the savings of their customers in state bonds. When the losses already sustained come to light in this way, people will see how the value of their mutual funds and pension funds has massively fallen. State bankruptcy could — dependent on how big it is — also trigger a collapse of the banking system. A cluster of bankruptcies of over-indebted market participants would be like a financial Armageddon. For that reason, politicians do all they can to prevent that scenario. Another path out of the debt trap is financial repression, as it is called. Financial repression means that people’s savings are increasingly funneled toward the state to enable the paying off of government debt. On the one hand, financial repression makes alternative investments unattractive, for example by imposing low interest rates on savings accounts. On the other hand, it encourages the buying of state bonds. For instance, it is very attractive for life insurance companies to invest in government bonds, due to regulations that reward this behavior. Coupled with real growth and a reduction of expenditures, financial repression could achieve a reduction of state debt. After the Second World War, the U.S. government was able to reduce its debt in relation to gross domestic product (GDP) from 130% in 1946 to 80% in 1952. But it is quite unlikely that such a trick would work now. At the time, the U.S. was at the end of a war that it had won. Government spending was sharply reduced from $118 billion in 1945 to $58 billion two years later. This occurred for the most part by reducing military expenditures. Imagine what would happen today if state expenses were halved. Everyone whose life depends on public funds would man the barricades. Over-indebted families and firms would go bankrupt in droves without the flow of money from the state. For this reason, cuts in spending similar to those in the U.S. after World War II appear to be unlikely. This is because these days, in Europe at least the majority of state expenses go not to the military, but to the welfare state. (In the U.S., they get about equal shares.) It thus might be more effective for politicians to solve the problem of too much debt by using taxes and political measures. The idea is simple. We reduce state debt and recapitalize the banks by seizing wealth from citizens — not indirectly through inflation, but directly by taxes. The state could expropriate assets in a massive way and thus pay back state debt. What do you think about a one-time wealth tax? It might not strike fear in the hearts of investors. It is just one-time after all. The state would sell the expropriated assets in order to pay down state debt and to recapitalize the banks. Indeed, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) recommended just that in 2013, suggesting that the EU governments put a one-time mandatory tax of 10% on all monetary assets. The goal: to bring down high government debts. There is an even more radical method for bringing an unstable monetary system back on its feet: real monetary reform, including cancellation of state debt. This option is also very attractive and is meant to reduce over-indebtedness without provoking massive inflation. It is like pressing a “reset” button on a computer. When everything runs well, a new start in the paper money system is the result. A reform like that worked in Germany after the Second World War. (Financial repression was not an alternative in Germany after the war). The paper currency in use at the time, the Reichsmark, was replaced with the Deutschemark paper currency. We do not want to discuss in detail the German currency reform of 1948. Just a short overview: people could exchange 60 Reichsmarks at a 1:1 ratio into D-Marks. All accounts over 60 Reichsmarks were simply divided by ten and exchanged to get D-Marks. All debts were reduced to one-tenth in value. The government’s debt was declared cancelled and void, but not all debt. Can you guess who was exempted from the state’s bankruptcy? That’s right. State bonds held by banks were not cancelled. The banks received compensation claims. In addition to these monetary measures, a one-time wealth tax of 50% was also imposed. This careful composition of measures, taken together, brought the following positive results: Over-indebtedness was reduced, the state was practically made free of debt, the banks were recapitalized by having their liabilities reduced by 90%, but not their total assets (government bonds and real estate), and savers had their assets to a large extent expropriated. The German currency reform thus exposed to the light of day the asset destruction of the war. An alternative to this is a “half-way” currency reform to reduce inflation, a so-called “bail-in,” as was tried in Cyprus in 2013, which turned bank creditors (savers) into bank shareholders. Bank liabilities are reduced in that way and at the same time, equity was increased. The supply of money falls and bank accounts were converted into bank shares. Imagine that: One day they tell you that you cannot access your checking account anymore, but you get shares in your bank instead (that you cannot sell for a while). A bail-in recapitalizes the banking system and at the same time eliminates bad debt. Equity capital can even increase so fast that the banks might even be able to handle a partial government default. The bail-in can thus be combined to great effect with a partial elimination of state debt. In the case of a bail-in, citizens who have invested in life insurance, which in turn is invested in bank debt and government debt, are hit by the losses. As a result, the over-indebtedness of banks and government would be brought down, at the cost of savers and those holding cash money. We do not know what the bureaucrats will choose to do in the end. In all probability it will be a mixture of some kind. But no matter what it looks like, what is not sustainable is more and more money and new debt. At some point, the end has to come. Sooner or later, the already existing losses and the illusion of wealth will be uncovered. In essence, it will be taxpayers, savers, and those holding money who will have to pay for the debt relief and to stabilize the currency. A one-time asset tax, a currency reform or a bail-in are not popular measures, because if used, they expose the losses that exist in a brutal and immediate way. For this reason, inflation is the most popular option chosen by politicians, allowing governments to hide the cost of rescuing over-indebted economic agents. However, the danger exists that inflation can get out of control. And we are steadily approaching that inevitable moment. The end of the road is coming into view. The monopoly on money is like the philosopher’s stone for the state. It allows the state to expand its power to an enormous extent. If inflation gets out of control and the monetary system collapses, then this power is gone. Not to mention that the real economic and thus tax losses would be massive. For this reason, it is very possible that politicians will be afraid of the inflation variant, in the end. Before we see galloping inflation, politicians will consider going with one of the other options and will try to use the “reset” button. And then we start over again from the beginning … So are we trapped in the system? Is it possible to just keep pressing the “reset” button again and again? Is the paper money system thus not really doomed? We have good news and bad news for you. First the bad news: So long as we have state money, bad money, we will always have too much debt. A currency reform or a bail-in could reduce the over-indebtedness for a short time, but this does not mean that the incentives for the system to self-destruct will disappear. In five, ten, or twenty years we will be in the same mess and will need the next reform. And in the meantime, tears to the social fabric, wealth redistribution, and suffering will continue. Now the good news: in the end, the ability of the paper money system to survive into the future is dependent on how often and how much people are fooled. There is thus a way out. Abraham Lincoln once said: “You can fool all the people some of the time, and some of the people all the time, but you cannot fool all the people all the time.” But how long will it take until people understand how fiendish our current monetary system is? How much time will it take until they understand that the system allows a minority of privileged people to print money out of thin air — at the expense of the rest of us? When will people understand that the state money system is unstable in and of itself and leads to serious economic crises, to unjust redistribution, to a decline in morality, to the destruction of the family, to the expansion of the state apparatus, to poverty, and to a lack of freedom? There is reason to hope: the more people who know the effects of state money, the harder it will be to simply push the “reset” button, because paper money in the end depends on trust. If that is lost, desperately pressing the “reset” button will not work. And then there will be the possibility of real reform — and good money. But only when enough people are convinced that good money is the best alternative. We have written this book in order to get the message out. Please help us. Speak with your friends and acquaintances. Have conversations in your local clubs and meet-ups, at concerts and sporting events, at the PTA and at your local neighborhood party. The more people who know what is really happening with money, the better, for you and for us all. Getting us off this runaway train will only work if there are enough people that resist the continuation of the money monopoly game. You can do your personal part for a better world. Here and today. The effort is worth it, and a lot depends on it. May we win!
