# Why You Have Not Heard of This Before

## Source Metadata

- Chapter number: 10
- TOC index: 16
- Part: main
- EPUB src: text/part0015.html
- Extraction mode: single-source

## Extracted Text

9. Why you have not heard of this before “Whether one likes it or not, it is a fact that the main issues of present-day politics are purely economic and cannot be understood without a grasp of economic theory.” - Ludwig von Mises Imagine that you are an entrepreneur and would like to sell an inferior product at a price that is too high. Something that older people for example would buy as a souvenir, say a cheap synthetic blanket. What would you have to do? Please think about it carefully. You would have to pull out all your shady advertising tricks. You would have to hire the best salesmen who would promote your junk product and help you lie to your customers. And you would have to be dishonest and unscrupulous. A prerequisite is that it would not bother you that you are cheating your customers. You would have to convince yourself that it is all ok. In any case, you would have to beat the advertising drum so loudly that your competition would be drowned out. And you would have to put all your effort into preventing people from getting word that your product is inferior. And now imagine that you are the manufacturer of a high quality product that you sell in the market for a fair price, a super-soft mohair wool blanket. You would never think of cheating your customers. You have a good reputation and do not fear that anyone would make false accusations against you about your blankets. While you can look yourself in the mirror every night with a good conscience, the unscrupulous seller on the other hand would actually have to take his mirror off the wall. Because for him, his behavior is a source of discomfort. What do we want to tell you with this comparison? Well, it is very simple. The economic and socio-political doctrines that have gained ground in the last few decades are like bad products, they are bad doctrines. Bad ideas are being spread. For this to work, those pushing the bad ideas have to promote them constantly and aggressively with dishonest methods and propaganda. And with regularity, until everyone believes that the doctrines that have been spread are the only correct doctrines. Just keep in mind that the state has no great interest in the truth about our monetary system coming out. If people knew the truth about our bad money and its effects, they would take actions to defend themselves against it. The money monopoly would collapse. And without that monopoly, things would look bleak for the state and the financial industry. Thus, the spread of bad doctrines is of enormous importance for certain groups. Primarily, in doing so, an appeal is made to people’s emotions, and in Germany as elsewhere, the word “social” is certainly the adjective most over-used by politicians today. How do you feel about the theories and ideas that we have presented to you thus far? Everything is logical, right? So logical, in fact, that no one has succeeded in proving these theories wrong. But now the time has come to admit that we have led you a bit astray. But not in order to sell you something bad. In contrast, we have supplied a good product. Better ideas. For this reason, we do not suffer a bad conscience. We have also thought of the packaging and gave our book a cool title. We could have called our book Introduction to the Monetary Theory of the Austrian School, or The Austrians Knew It All Along. But would you have had any interest in a book like that, let alone bought it? Let’s be honest. Not really, right? Maybe you would have thought, “my kids don’t go to school in Austria, so what does the Austrian school system have to do with me? Or, what do the Austrians know that I don’t know already?” To be precise, we should have called our book Introduction to the Monetary Theory of the Austrian School of Economics, because that is what it is. But we didn’t. Because you would have been highly unlikely to want to read the book. Who after all wants to spend their spare time reading macroeconomics? Only a few. So please be thankful that we tricked you a bit. Maybe you don’t quite realize it, but with the information in this book we have put you in a position to understand and interpret the problems of our time, and most of all the effects of bad money. You will now understand this better than most mainstream economists. We knew, by the way, that our strategy would work. The logic of the Austrian school of economics is irresistible to people who have an open mind. You have just completed a basic course in Austrian monetary and business cycle theory. Congratulations, you know more than 99.9% of the population in this field. And why didn’t you get bored reading this? (At least we assume you didn’t, if you have made it this far.) Because the theory of the Austrian school is a theory of human action. And because we are all humans and we all act, we can all see ourselves from this point of view. The difference between the Austrian school and the mainstream schools of macroeconomic thought is — literally — the way of thinking about individual behavior. The Austrian school economists begin their thinking with the individual in mind, the individual person. By contrast, current macroeconomic theories mathematicise the economy. But only an equilibrium model of economics can be mathematicised — a model where the acting, creative individual has no place. Current macroeconomic theory views society and the economy as something static. It loves to deal in figures and statistics. We showed you how that worked in the calculation of the rate of consumer price increase, as an example. And the person as an acting individual is completely ignored there. And that is nonsense. There is never equilibrium. Billions of people have new experiences every day and learn from them. They then act differently than they would have acted that morning, an hour before, or a minute before. You will also think and act differently after reading this book. You will change your actions. You will understand and see the world through different eyes. In his book Memoirs, Mises wrote: “What distinguishes the Austrian school and will lend it everlasting fame is its doctrine of economic action, in contrast to one of economic equilibrium or nonaction. The Austrian school makes use of the ideas of rest and equilibrium, without which economic thought cannot get along. But it is always aware of the purely instrumental nature of these ideas. The Austrian school aims to account for prices actually paid in the market, and not just prices that might be paid under certain never-realizable conditions. It rejects the mathematical method, not because of ignorance or an aversion to mathematical accuracy, but because it does not place importance upon the detailed description of the condition of a hypothetical and static equilibrium. The Austrian school has never succumbed to the fatal illusion that values can be measured, and has never misunderstood the fact that statistical data have nothing to do with economic theory, but belong to the history of economics alone.” (p. 28) In modern macroeconomic theory, the most simple of topics are made overly complicated, apparently with intent, so that everything appears to be very important. This intimidates people, and that is the desired result. It means that people don’t ask questions, saying to themselves, “This is all too complicated for me.” But economics is in reality very simple. It functions in the same way that it did thousands of years ago. People come together to voluntarily engage in commerce with one another for their mutual benefit. People specialize and divide work among themselves to advance their condition. Would you sell something or offer a service to make your own condition worse? Of course not. This is the foundation of all action and has nothing to do with greed, which so many people want to disparage market participants for today. This last chapter is not suitable for returning once more to our small city. But we would like to “abduct” you now for a short time and take you to another city — Vienna. Not to today’s Vienna, but rather to the Vienna of ca. 1900. Economist Carl Menger (1840–1921) is known as the founder of the Austrian school of economics. He wrote in his work Principles of Economics in 1871: “Money is not an invention of the state. It is not the product of a legislative act. Even the sanction of political authority is not necessary for its existence. Certain commodities came to be money quite naturally, as the result of economic relationships that were independent of the power of the state.” (pp. 261–62) Please read that to your banker the next time you stop by your local bank. He will laugh in your face or look at you with a puzzled expression on his face. The latter is more likely, because he will not know what you are talking about. Carl Menger was the man who was crucial in inspiring Ludwig von Mises, the greatest economist of the 20th century. Mises, in his work Memoirs, writes: “When I first came to the university, Carl Menger was nearing the end of his teaching career. There was little attention paid the Austrian school of economics at the university, and I had no interest in it at the time. Around Christmas, 1903, I read Menger’s Grundsätze der Volkswirtschaftslehre [Principles of Economics] for the first time. It was through this book that I became an economist.” (p. 25) One of Ludwig von Mises’s central beliefs was that the state needed to get out of the management of money. He felt that the central bank and the state monopoly on money would have to be done away with. He would not bend or compromise on this. He was without exception or compromise a libertarian and a champion of free markets. Mises’s first career choice was the Vienna Chamber of Commerce, Trade and Industry, which he belonged to as of 1909. He was unable to attain a professorship at a public university, and that remained so for his entire life. Does that surprise anyone? They just didn’t want him. Another time, he refused an offer of a well-paid position from the banking industry. Mises wrote in his Memoirs: “After the war my expertise in money and banking was so widely recognized that many of the banks offered me a position on their boards. But until 1921 I always declined, as I was not given the assurance that my advice would be followed. Later I considered banks insolvent and irretrievably lost; events proved me right.” (p. 59) At the same time, Mises did not want to stop teaching. His private seminar, which he held every other week from 1920 to 1934, had 20 to 25 participants, the most famous of which was Friedrich August von Hayek. Hayek would later win the Nobel Prize in Economics in 1974. In Mises’s pioneering work The Theory of Money and Credit — which was published more than 100 years ago — he showed that expanding the money supply has no social benefit. He did show how doing so causes a redistribution of wealth, and results in a purchasing power of money that is lower than it would have been without the increase in the money supply. And when the money expansion occurs through a credit expansion by the banking system, then a fake boom occurs, as well as malinvestment. This is Mises’s innovative and today highly relevant theory of economic boom and bust. Mises wrote about his theory of money in his Memoirs: “As could be expected, my book was rejected by German scientific journals in a most precipitous manner. I paid little attention to this. I knew that my views would soon take hold. I saw with horror the catastrophe which I had predicted standing before the door. New books that are ‘destroyed’ by critics are lasting and valuable. He who only says what others want to hear is better off remaining silent.” (pp. 48–49) Mises’s insights were revolutionary. In 1922, his book Socialism: An Economic and Sociological Analysis was published. In it, he showed that socialism cannot work, and why. And that social democracy also cannot work. This book made Mises famous immediately and also made him disliked by socialists around the world. He said: “All attempts at disproving the conclusiveness of my thesis were destined to fail.” (p. 95) And it was exactly this inability to challenge them that brought increasing hostility from the socialist camp, as well as from the German National Socialists in the 1930s. Just an aside: National Socialism and communism are not opposites, but rather brothers in spirit. They are merely competitors of one another. Both have totalitarianism in common, and both reject the free market system. Mises knew that the victory of National Socialism in Germany at that time would also soon threaten Austria. After he published Socialism, and as a classical liberal (libertarian) and a jew, he could be certain that the Gestapo would come looking for him after a Nazi takeover of Austria. For this reason, in 1934 he left Austria to move to Geneva, Switzerland. During that time, what can be considered without a doubt his most important work was written, Human Action: A Treatise on Economics. In it, he developed his theory of human action, which he called praxeology. With it, contradiction-free thought and error-free thought can result in propositions that are as irrefutable as mathematical formulas. Due to the war, the atmosphere in Switzerland in 1934 was becoming increasingly tense and thus Mises left and fled to the United States. In the meantime, the Nazis had marched into Vienna and had found Mises’s entire library of books and his writings, and packed them up and transported them away. It took almost 60 years for the documents to turn up again. In the 1990s, they were discovered in an archive in Moscow. The Soviet army had confiscated them in 1945 and taken them to Moscow. Why do we describe this in such detail? To make clear that Mises was treated badly, almost like an enemy of the state. Why was a man of knowledge and a professor treated so badly? A man who had spent his life in the service of truth? A man who stood for nothing other than the protection of property, equality before the law, and free markets? They thought him dangerous? Dangerous to whom? Does this list of values contain anything that you yourself would not support? Politicians worldwide fear what Mises said. Why? Clearly they fear being pushed aside and viewed as unimportant when people find out that state intervention in the economy and in society are at the root of our present economic problems. You probably have asked yourself, “Why doesn’t the ‘Austrian’ way of thinking win out by itself, if it is so clear and logical? Why have I not heard about it? There must be a catch.” And the authors here are claiming that in a free market, the best “products” do tend to win out in the long run. But then, what has gone wrong? Well, there are several reasons why a large part of the general public has not heard of the teachings of the Austrians. The state and politicians find the teachings and theories of the Austrians highly disquieting. And because the Austrian school theory was never successfully shown to be false, it is simply kept hush-hush and is not taught anywhere. Not at state universities nor at other (public) schools. And some professors who claim to know with 100% certainty that theories they themselves (must) teach are the worst theories, are also silent about it. Anything else could very quickly represent a danger to their careers. Imagine that you were a professor at a state university and thought about questioning the state’s money monopoly. Would you be sawing off the branch that you sit on? These subjects are taboo, they are sacred cows that cannot be touched. Even more unthinkable would be a professor defending the view of libertarian economist Hans-Herrmann Hoppe that the state is an “expropriating property protector and a law-breaking law protector.” Do you think such a professor would have a problem with their employer? Anyone who teaches the theories of the Austrian school will have doors slammed in his face in the state-controlled education system. And he will also have problems finding a teaching position, and will have to accept reductions in income and academic reputation. Just as happened to Mises. What is most unpleasant for the state and politicians is without a doubt the call by the Austrians for a free market monetary policy. You already know that in such a system, the political class would have access to only a small fraction of the money it now has at its disposal under our current state monopoly monetary system. In such a system, politicians would be left high and dry, like fish out of water. The central bankers and the bankers themselves would find the banning of the creation of money out of thin air and the closing of the central banks to be very unpleasant. And who then would want to finance all the monetary theorists who publish books and essays about how state monetary policy should be formulated, and who — in many cases — have well-paid consulting jobs? It is clear why the mainstream economists defend state money. After all, they have built their intellectual careers on this error, and in most cases they have mouths to feed at home. Economists of the Austrian school are in favor of free markets and an economy without state interference in general, not just in money. But because making laws and enacting regulations is what politicians do, it would not be long before people got the idea of getting rid of politician as a job category. A nice thought. But … Is “politician” a real job? Someone who has made it their job to torture and rule over their fellow citizens with laws and regulations? You decide. For the state and for politicians it is important to find someone who is responsible for all the problems in the economy and in society. Ludwig von Mises wrote this in his book Bureaucracy: “The main propaganda trick of the supporters of the allegedly ‘progressive’ policy of government control is to blame capitalism for all that is unsatisfactory in present-day conditions and to extol the blessings which socialism has in store for mankind. They have never attempted to prove their fallacious dogmas or still less to refute the objections raised by economists. All they did was to call their adversaries names and to cast suspicion upon their motives. And, unfortunately, the average citizen cannot see through these stratagems.” (p. 111) And in order for the average person to not see through the deception, the good teachings and the better ideasof the Austrians must be withheld from them. Because those proclaiming the (statist) teachings only have bad teachings and bad ideas, they have to continuously repeat them, like a broken record. Thus, capitalism is blamed for today’s problems. But does capitalism even exist anymore? The government’s share of the economy in most industrial nations is close to 50%, is it not? Isn’t everything regulated in almost all areas of life? We wrote about this extensively in Chapter 7. Most people associate capitalism with something negative. Anyone speaking out for capitalism today almost automatically “outs” themselves as “un-social.” And even fewer speak out for a free market economy. “Free market economy” sounds better than “capitalism,” right? But it is the same thing. Many politicians do not want to speak out against free markets. To be against free markets means — by implication — to favor state regulations. That would be bad for one’s image. And because politicians fear nothing more than a bad image and don’t want to be viewed as regulators, but rather as people who merely are correcting erroneous developments in the interest of the citizens, they need someone to blame for those erroneous developments. And that is of course not too hard, given capitalism’s negative reputation. Sometimes they use the term “market failure.” Can markets fail? Don’t you see what kind of game is being played here? In pursuing these goals, our benevolent defenders of the state do not shy away from using propagandistic methods. However: Propaganda is one of the worst evils of bureaucracy and socialism. In Bureaucracy, Mises cogently describes propaganda as “always[being]the propaganda of lies, errors and superstitions.” (p. 113) But we want to go a step further. The concept of propaganda is — in our view — still too weak to describe what politicians offer up to us every day. Demagoguery is a better term for it. Mises used that term at another point. That is exaggerated, you say? Read how author Martin Morlock defined demagoguery in his book Die Hohe Schule der Verführung (The High Art of Seduction) as follows: “Anyone is using demagoguery who, at an advantageous moment promotes a political or ideological goal by flattering the masses and appealing to their feelings, instincts, and prejudices; and in addition, who is guilty of lies and promotes hatred of others, who overstates the truth, or represents things in a grossly simplified manner, portrays the thing that he is promoting as what only reasonable and good people can believe, and the way that he puts it forward or proposes to put forward as the only possible way.” (p. 24) No other further comment should be needed here. But why don’t the representatives of the Austrian school oppose it? The question is justified. Just try competing with those who have succeeded in gaining power over money itself. They have almost unlimited means to corrupt the people and to — above all — corrupt the opinion leaders in a society. Try competing with those who have monopolized the education system and who determine how subjects are to be taught in schools and universities. Try competing with those who write the laws and are themselves the final judges in all issues. Any questions? In addition, let’s not have any illusions. The teachings of the Austrian school are not always comfortable and easy. They insist that before money is invested, it has to first be saved; that before consumption there has to be production. But when, as today, there is cheap money available in the form of credit on demand, why not use it? And in this way people yield only too gladly to the temptations and promises of politicians. Democracy is also not innocent there. It gives a majority the power to steal from the minority. What else do you call it when a majority is in favor of tax increases, but those increases only affect a small part of the population, for example a tax on the rich or a wealth tax? Look at that from the point of view of a politician: If you conduct a campaign as a demagogue, you will quickly have the majority on your side. Ludwig von Mises was always convinced that the best ideas win out in the long run. However, he did not want to change his “political way of fighting,” as he called it, because he did not want to be reduced to the moral level of his opponents, in other words, to use base tactics and strategies. In Socialismhe wrote: “When nations rush blindly towards destruction, Liberalism must try to enlighten them. But even if they do not hear, whether because they are deaf or because the warning voice is too feeble, one must not seek to seduce them to the right mode of conduct by tactical and demagogic artifice. It might be possible to destroy society by demagogy. But it can never be built up by that means.” (p. 418) The Austrian school of economics has had a kind of renaissance for some years now. Besides the original Ludwig von Mises Institute in Auburn, Alabama, there is now also a Ludwig von Mises Institute in Germany and in other countries as well, centers from which the better ideas are spread. Our main concern is in removing the state’s money monopoly. Yes, get rid of it. The state will not give it up voluntarily, but only under great pressure, which we can only create by working together. If this is successful, it would be a huge step forward. A great step towards smaller government, because the unlimited capacity for spending would be taken out of the hands of politicians. And with that we would have taken a decisive step towards freedom. Many of the problems that are discussed day in and day out throughout the media, spun, and commented on by the left and the right, would simply vanish into thin air. The nightly news, which are only for masochists, with their endless news stories about politics and politicians, could be reduced to five minutes. In that five minutes, everything important could be said. Imagine what you could do with the time left over! And now to our appeal to you. Yes, you read that right. Our appeal, not our request. We call on you to help out, in spreading the teachings of the Austrian school of economics, and in spreading better ideas. What is at stake is nothing short of everyone’s freedom and wealth. Concentrate first on your family and acquaintances and on enlightening them about the fact that state money is bad money. Use the social networks. Have discussions. You now have the better arguments and they are irresistible. Anyone who you can enlighten and win over is a potential ally. And keep up on the latest editorial comments and analyses of current problems, from the Austrian point of view; for example from the Ludwig von Mises Institute in the country you live in. You will quickly find those of the same view on the Internet. There are more of them than you might think, but not enough by a long shot. The more people that view the state with distrust, the harder it will be for the state to rule over us like a nanny, to defraud us and steal from us. Join the ranks. Make Mises’s motto your own — Tu ne cede malis sed contra audentior ito — Do not give in to evil, but proceed ever more boldly against it. No one put this better than Mises himself in his book Bureaucracy. So we will let him have the last word here: “The aim of the popularization of economic studies is not to make every man an economist. The idea is to equip the citizen for his civic functions in community life. The conflict between capitalism and totalitarianism, on the outcome of which the fate of civilization depends, will not be decided by civil wars and revolutions. It is a war of ideas. Public opinion will determine victory and defeat.” (p. 115)
